---
title: African Burial Ground National Monument 
date: 2019-05-22 
draft: false 
---

Story source:

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/African_Burial_Ground_National_Monument


**African Burial Ground National Monument** is a monument at Duane Street and
African Burial Ground Way (Elk Street) in the [Civic
Center](/wiki/Civic_Center,_Manhattan "Civic Center, Manhattan") section of
[Lower Manhattan](/wiki/Lower_Manhattan "Lower Manhattan"), [New York
City](/wiki/New_York_City "New York City"). Its main building is the [Ted
Weiss Federal Building](/wiki/Ted_Weiss_Federal_Building "Ted Weiss Federal
Building") at 290 [Broadway](/wiki/Broadway_\(Manhattan\) "Broadway
\(Manhattan\)").[4] The site contains the remains of more than 419
[Africans](/wiki/African_Americans "African Americans") buried during the late
17th and 18th centuries in a portion of what was the largest
[colonial](/wiki/Thirteen_Colonies "Thirteen Colonies")-era cemetery for
people of African descent, some [free](/wiki/Free_black "Free black"), most
[enslaved](/wiki/Slavery_in_the_United_States "Slavery in the United
States").[5] Historians estimate there may have been as many as 10,000[6]
–20,000 burials in what was called the " **Negroes Burial Ground** " in the
1700s. The five to six acre site's excavation and study was called "the most
important historic urban archaeological project in the United States."[7] The
Burial Ground site is New York's earliest known African-American "cemetery";
studies show an estimated 15,000 African American people were buried here.[8]

The discovery highlighted the forgotten history of enslaved Africans in
colonial and federal New York City, who were integral to its development. By
the [American Revolutionary War](/wiki/American_Revolutionary_War "American
Revolutionary War"), they constituted nearly a quarter of the population in
the city. New York had the second-largest number of enslaved Africans in the
nation after [Charleston, South Carolina](/wiki/Charleston,_South_Carolina
"Charleston, South Carolina"). Scholars and African-American civic activists
joined to publicize the importance of the site and lobby for its preservation.
The site was designated a [National Historic
Landmark](/wiki/National_Historic_Landmark "National Historic Landmark") in
1993 and a [National Monument](/wiki/National_Monument_\(United_States\)
"National Monument \(United States\)") in 2006 by President [George W.
Bush](/wiki/George_W._Bush "George W. Bush").

In 2003 [Congress](/wiki/United_States_Congress "United States Congress")
appropriated funds for a memorial at the site and directed redesign of the
federal courthouse to allow for this. A design competition attracted more than
60 proposals for a design. The memorial was dedicated in 2007 to commemorate
the role of Africans and African Americans in colonial and federal New York
City, and in United States history. Several pieces of public art were also
commissioned for the site. A visitor center opened in 2010 to provide
interpretation of the site and African-American history in New York.

In 2016, an offer to purchase 22 Reade Street and the Burial Grounds was made
with a Letter of Intent to the City of New York. The bidding group was led by
African-American owned development firm The Hoeg Corporation; Burial Ground
Monument architect, Rodney Leon; and Italian development company, Bizzi &
Partners Development.[9]

In 2018, the African Burial Ground Monument was defaced by graffiti
"suggesting African-Americans should be killed; the slur was scrawled across a
plaque on an African Burial Ground Memorial plaque.[10]

## Africans and African Americans in New York
City[[edit](/w/index.php?title=African_Burial_Ground_National_Monument&action=edit&section=1
"Edit section: Africans and African Americans in New York City")]

### Pre-Revolutionary
War[[edit](/w/index.php?title=African_Burial_Ground_National_Monument&action=edit&section=2
"Edit section: Pre-Revolutionary War")]

[Slavery in the New York City area](/wiki/History_of_slavery_in_New_York
"History of slavery in New York") was introduced by the [Dutch West India
Company](/wiki/Netherlands "Netherlands") in [New
Netherland](/wiki/New_Netherland "New Netherland") in about 1626 with the
arrival of Paul D'Angola, Simon Congo, Lewis Guinea, Jan Guinea, Ascento
Angola, and six other men. Their names denote their place of origin:
[Angola](/wiki/Angola "Angola"), the [Congo](/wiki/Kingdom_of_Kongo "Kingdom
of Kongo"), and [Guinea](/wiki/Guinea "Guinea"). Two years after their arrival
three female Angolan slaves arrived. These two groups heralded the beginning
of slavery in what would become New York City, and which would continue for
two hundred years.[11] The first slave auction in the city took place in 1655
at Pearl Street and [Wall Street](/wiki/Wall_Street "Wall Street") \- then on
the [East River](/wiki/East_River "East River"). Although the Dutch imported
Africans as slaves, it was possible for some to gain freedom or "half-freedom"
during the time of Dutch rule. In 1643, Paul D'Angola and his companions
petitioned the [Dutch West India Company](/wiki/Dutch_West_India_Company
"Dutch West India Company") for their freedom. Their request was granted,
resulting in their acquisition of land on which to build their own houses and
farm. By the mid-17th century, [farms of free
blacks](/wiki/Land_of_the_Blacks_\(Manhattan\) "Land of the Blacks
\(Manhattan\)") covered 130 acres where [Washington Square
Park](/wiki/Washington_Square_Park "Washington Square Park") later
appeared.[12] Even slaves in full bondage were granted certain rights and
afforded protections such as the prohibition against arbitrary physical
punishment – for example, [whipping](/wiki/Flagellation "Flagellation").

After the English took over [New Amsterdam](/wiki/New_Amsterdam "New
Amsterdam") in 1664, they changed the name to New York (after the [Duke of
York](/wiki/Duke_of_York "Duke of York")) and changed the rules governing
slavery in the colony. Some 40 percent of the small population was in
bondage.[14] The new slavery rules were more harsh and restrictive than those
of the Dutch, and rescinded many of the former rights and protections of
slaves, such as the prohibition against arbitrary physical punishment. In 1697
[Trinity Church](/wiki/Trinity_Church_\(Manhattan\) "Trinity Church
\(Manhattan\)") gained control of the burial grounds in the city and passed an
ordinance excluding blacks from the right to be buried in churchyards. When
Trinity took control of the municipal burial ground, now its northern
graveyard, it barred Africans from interment within the city limits.[14]
Through much of the 18th century, the African burying ground was beyond the
northern boundary of the city, which was just beyond what is today [Chambers
Street](/wiki/Chambers_Street_\(Manhattan\) "Chambers Street \(Manhattan\)").

As the city population increased, so did the number of residents who held
slaves. "In 1703, 42 percent of New York's households had slaves, much more
than Philadelphia and Boston combined."[15] Most slaveholding households had
only a few slaves, used primarily for domestic work. By the 1740s, 20 percent
of the population of New York were slaves,[16] totaling about 2,500
people.[12] Slaves also worked as skilled artisans and craftsmen associated
with shipping, construction, and other trades, as well as laborers. "On the
eve of the American Revolution, New York City had the largest number of
enslaved Africans of any English colonial settlement except [Charleston, South
Carolina](/wiki/Charleston,_South_Carolina "Charleston, South Carolina"), and
it had the highest proportion of slaves to Europeans of any northern
settlement."[14] Africans had become essential to the development of New York.

### Post-Revolutionary
War[[edit](/w/index.php?title=African_Burial_Ground_National_Monument&action=edit&section=3
"Edit section: Post-Revolutionary War")]

During the [Revolutionary War](/wiki/American_Revolutionary_War "American
Revolutionary War"), the British occupied New York City in the summer of 1776
and they kept control until after the war ended and they departed on
[Evacuation Day](/wiki/Evacuation_Day_\(New_York\) "Evacuation Day \(New
York\)"): November 25, 1783. As in the other rebellious American colonies, the
British had offered freedom to slaves who left rebel masters; this was done in
part to cause economic damage to the rebel Americans. These individuals were
listed in the _[Book of Negroes](/wiki/Book_of_Negroes "Book of Negroes")_.
This promise of freedom attracted thousands of slaves to the city who escaped
to British lines. In 1781 the New York legislature offered a financial
incentive to slaveholders who assigned their slaves to military service, and
promised freedom at war's end for the slaves.

By 1780 the African and African-descendant community swelled to about 10,000
in British-occupied New York City, which became the center of [free
blacks](/wiki/Free_people_of_color "Free people of color") in North
America.[16] Among those who escaped to New York were Deborah Squash and her
husband Harvey, who fled from [George Washington](/wiki/George_Washington
"George Washington")'s plantation in Virginia.[16] After the end of the war,
according to provisions concerning property in the [Treaty of
Paris](/wiki/Treaty_of_Paris_\(1783\) "Treaty of Paris \(1783\)"), the
Americans demanded the return of all former slaves under British control. The
British refused the American request and evacuated 3,000
[freedmen](/wiki/Freedmen "Freedmen") with their troops in 1783 for
resettlement in [Nova Scotia](/wiki/Nova_Scotia "Nova Scotia"), other British
colonies, and England.[16] Other freedmen scattered from the city to evade
slave catchers.

Aided by individual manumissions after war's end, by 1790 about one-third of
the blacks in the city were free.[12] The total city population was 33,131,
according to the first national census.[17]

In 1799 the state legislature passed "An Act for the Gradual Abolition of
Slavery" with little opposition. Similar to Pennsylvania's law, it provided
for gradual [manumission](/wiki/Manumission "Manumission") of slaves. Children
born to slave mothers after July 4, 1799, were considered legally free, but
had to serve as [indentured servants](/wiki/Indentured_servants "Indentured
servants") to their mother's master, until age 28 for men and 25 for women,
before gaining social freedom. Until reaching age 21, they were considered the
property of the mother's master. All slaves already in bondage before July 4,
1799, remained slaves for life, although they were reclassified as "indentured
servants."[15][16][18]

In 1817, the New York legislature granted freedom to all children born to
slaves after July 4, 1799, with total abolition of slavery to take effect on
July 4, 1827. On this date, known as Emancipation Day, more than 10,000 slaves
were freed in New York State with no financial compensation to their former
owners.[19] Blacks paraded in New York City to celebrate.

Under the 1777 New York constitution, all free men had to satisfy a property
requirement to vote, which eliminated poorer men from voting, both blacks and
whites.[18] A new constitution in 1821 [eliminated the property requirement
for white men](/wiki/Universal_manhood_suffrage "Universal manhood suffrage"),
but kept it for blacks, effectively continuing to
[disfranchise](/wiki/Disfranchisement_after_Reconstruction_era
"Disfranchisement after Reconstruction era") them. This lasted until passage
of the [Fifteenth
Amendment](/wiki/Fifteenth_Amendment_to_the_United_States_Constitution
"Fifteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution") to the [U.S.
Constitution](/wiki/U.S._Constitution "U.S. Constitution") in 1870.[18]

The early history of free blacks and slaves in New York City became
overshadowed by the waves of mid- to late nineteenth century immigration from
Europe, which dramatically expanded the population and added to the ethnic
diversity. In addition, most of the ancestors of today's African-American
population in the city arrived from the South in the [Great
Migration](/wiki/Great_Migration_\(African_American\) "Great Migration
\(African American\)") of the first half of the twentieth century. In a
rapidly changing city, the early colonial and federal history of African
Americans was lost.

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/63/African_Burial_Ground_Manhattan.jpg/260px-
African_Burial_Ground_Manhattan.jpg)](/wiki/File:African_Burial_Ground_Manhattan.jpg)

The "Negros Burial Ground" near the

[Collect Pond](/wiki/Collect_Pond "Collect Pond")

, looking south (late 1700s map)

## Site
history[[edit](/w/index.php?title=African_Burial_Ground_National_Monument&action=edit&section=4
"Edit section: Site history")]

### "Negros Burial
Ground"[[edit](/w/index.php?title=African_Burial_Ground_National_Monument&action=edit&section=5
"Edit section: "Negros Burial Ground"")]

The burial ground in use for New York Town residents in the late 1600s was
located at what is now the [north graveyard](/wiki/Trinity_Church_Cemetery
"Trinity Church Cemetery") of [Trinity
Church](/wiki/Trinity_Church_\(Manhattan\) "Trinity Church \(Manhattan\)") (of
the [Anglican](/wiki/Anglican "Anglican") / [Church of
England](/wiki/Church_of_England "Church of England") \- today the [Episcopal
Church U.S.A.](/wiki/Episcopal_Church_\(United_States\) "Episcopal Church
\(United States\)")). The public burial ground was open to all for a fee,
including to enslaved Africans. Some burials of deceased slaves were made just
south of the public burial ground to avoid the fee.

The [stockade](/wiki/Stockade "Stockade") in this area ran northeast from the
present-day corner of Broadway and Chambers Street to [Foley
Square](/wiki/Foley_Square "Foley Square"); the wide street on the top right
(southwest) is [Broadway](/wiki/Broadway_\(Manhattan\) "Broadway
\(Manhattan\)").

After Trinity was established as a parish church in 1697, the vestryman of the
church began taking control of land in Lower Manhattan, including existing
public burial grounds. When Trinity purchased the land at [Wall
Street](/wiki/Wall_Street "Wall Street") and Broadway for the construction of
their church, they passed a resolution on October 25, 1697:

> That after the Expiration of four weeks from the dates hereof no Negro's be
buried within the bounds & Limitts of the Church Yard of Trinity Church, that
is to say, in the rear of the present burying place & that no person or Negro
whatsoever, do presume after the terme above Limitted to break up any ground
for the burying of his Negro, as they will answer it at their perill & that
this order be forthwith publish'd.

The "rear of the present burying place" did not include the [town cemetery
(now the north churchyard)](/wiki/Trinity_Church_Cemetery "Trinity Church
Cemetery"). The church petitioned for control of this burial ground, which was
granted by the colonial [Province of New York](/wiki/Province_of_New_York
"Province of New York") on April 22, 1703.

This prohibition against the burial of those of African descent necessitated
finding another area acceptable to the colonial authorities. What would become
the "Negro's Burial ground" was located on what was then the outskirts of the
developed town, just north of present-day Chambers Street and west of the
former [Collect Pond](/wiki/Collect_Pond "Collect Pond") (later the infamous
neighborhood of [Five Points](/wiki/Five_Points_\(Manhattan\) "Five Points
\(Manhattan\)")). The area was part of a land grant issued to Cornelius van
Borsum on behalf of his wife Sara Roelofs (1624–1693) for her services as an
interpreter between the town of New York and the various Native American
tribes in the area, such as the [Lenape](/wiki/Lenape "Lenape") and
[Wappinger](/wiki/Wappinger "Wappinger"). The land would remain part of her
estate until the late 1790s when the grade was raised with
[landfill](/wiki/Landfill "Landfill") in anticipation of development, and the
land subdivided into building lots.

Labelled on old maps as the "Negros Burial Ground," the 6.6-acre area was
first recorded as being used around 1712 for the burials of enslaved and freed
people of African descent. The first burials may date from the late 1690s
after Trinity barred African burials in the former city cemetery. The burial
ground remained in use until 1794.

The area of the burial ground was in a shallow valley surrounded by low hills
on the east, south and west, which enveloped the southern shore of the
[Collect Pond](/wiki/Collect_Pond "Collect Pond") and the Little Collect. The
burial ground was outside the [stockade](/wiki/Stockade "Stockade") marking
the northern boundary of the city. The [stockade](/wiki/Stockade "Stockade")
in this area ran northeast from the present-day corner of Broadway and
Chambers Street to [Foley Square](/wiki/Foley_Square "Foley Square") after it
had expanded northward, similar in form and function to the former stockade on
Wall Street.

The revelation that physicians and medical students were illegally digging up
bodies for dissection from this burial ground precipitated the [1788 Doctors'
Riot](/wiki/1788_Doctors%27_Riot "1788 Doctors' Riot").

After the city closed the cemetery in 1794, the area was platted for
development. The grade of the land was raised with up to 25 feet (7.6 metres)
of [landfill](/wiki/Landfill "Landfill") at the lowest points covering the
cemetery, thus preserving the burials and the original grade level. As urban
development took place over the fill, the burial ground was largely forgotten.
The first large-scale development on the land was the construction of the
[A.T. Stewart Company Store](/wiki/280_Broadway "280 Broadway"), the country's
first [department store](/wiki/Department_store "Department store"); it opened
in 1846 at the corner of 280 Broadway and [Chambers
Street](/wiki/Chambers_Street_\(Manhattan\) "Chambers Street \(Manhattan\)").
Several skeletons were unearthed during the commencement of building the
store.[21]

The site's earliest discovery in the early 19th century seems to have aroused
little interest. According to an article in [The New York
Tribune](/wiki/New_York_Tribune "New York Tribune"), homeowner James Gemmel,
who owned a house at 290 Broadway in the early 19th century, told an unnamed
daughter that when the cellar for their house was being dug many human bones
were found. He assumed that he had discovered a potter's field.[22] In 1897,
when the building at 290 Broadway was demolished to make way for the [R. G.
Dun and Company](/wiki/Dun_%26_Bradstreet "Dun & Bradstreet") Building (later
financial firm of Dun & Bradstreet), workers in excavating found a large
number of human bones.[23] Some concluded at that time that these were
connected to a [1741 incident](/wiki/New_York_Conspiracy_of_1741 "New York
Conspiracy of 1741") in which thirteen African Americans were burned at the
stake and eighteen were hanged,[22] however others wondered whether the bones
were of Dutch or Indian origin.[21][24] Many bones were taken as souvenirs by
so-called "relic hunters."[21][24]

In October 1991, the [United States Government](/wiki/United_States_Government
"United States Government") agency, the [General Services
Administration](/wiki/General_Services_Administration "General Services
Administration") (GSA) announced the discovery (or rediscovery) of intact
burials during an archaeological survey and excavation for the construction of
a new $275 million federal office building planned at 290 Broadway between
Reade and Chambers Streets.[25] The building was to be later known as the [Ted
Weiss Federal Building](/wiki/Ted_Weiss_Federal_Building "Ted Weiss Federal
Building"), named for a deceased [U.S.
Representative](/wiki/United_States_Representative "United States
Representative") (Congressman) from New York [Ted Weiss](/wiki/Ted_Weiss "Ted
Weiss"). The agency had done an [environmental impact
statement](/wiki/Environmental_impact_statement "Environmental impact
statement") (EIS) prior to purchase of the site, but the archaeological survey
had predicted that human remains would not be found because of the long
history of urban development in that area.[14]

### Discovery of site and
controversy[[edit](/w/index.php?title=African_Burial_Ground_National_Monument&action=edit&section=6
"Edit section: Discovery of site and controversy")]

After the discovery of the first intact burials became publicly known, the
African-American community became very concerned. With the pressure of
construction costs, GSA tried to continue excavation and construction on the
site. The community believed it was not being sufficiently consulted and that
respect was not being given to the nature of the discoveries. They believed
that the burial findings required a better archaeological project design for
protection and study of the remains.[14]

Initially, GSA had planned full archaeological retrieval of the remains as
full mitigation of the effects of its construction project on the burial
ground. Within the year, its teams removed the remains of 420 persons from the
site, but it had become clear that the extent of the burial ground was too
large to be fully excavated. In 1992, activists staged a protest at the site
about GSA's handling of the burial issue, especially when it was found that
some intact burials were broken up during construction excavation at part of
the site.[14]

GSA halted construction until the site could be thoroughly assessed. It
provided additional funding to conduct a further archaeological excavation to
reveal any other bodies on the site and to assess the remains.[14] Located
between [New York City Hall](/wiki/New_York_City_Hall "New York City Hall")
and the federal courts, the site had symbolic value. The "invisibility" of
Black history in New York City partially accounts for the importance of the
Foley Square site"; activists hoped to find a means there to redress "the
injustice and the imbalance of the historic record, and to give voice to the
silenced ones".[14]

Although archaeologists studied the site and the remains for almost a dozen
years, critics of the construction project believed GSA's original
archaeological research design was inadequate, as it did not require a plan
for the treatment of uncovered remains.[14] In addition, the African-
descendant community in New York City was not consulted in the development of
the research design, nor were any archaeologists who had experience studying
the African [diaspora](/wiki/Diaspora "Diaspora"), although GSA had
distributed the EIS to more than 200 state and local agencies and
stakeholders, many recommended by the city.[14] In the early stages of the
project, national GSA officials and related Congressional committees directed
that excavation and construction proceed.[14]

Oversight of the project increased by stakeholders, such as the [Advisory
Council on Historic
Preservation](/wiki/Advisory_Council_on_Historic_Preservation "Advisory
Council on Historic Preservation") and community activists. After continued
protests from a coalition of community members, politicians, and scholars, in
1992 the [House Subcommittee on Public
Works](/wiki/United_States_House_of_Representatives "United States House of
Representatives") held budget hearings for GSA in New York, at which it heard
testimony from a wide variety of critics of GSA's handling of the project and
also heard from the GSA Administrator.[14] Several changes occurred. Control
of the burial site was transferred from an archaeological firm in the city to
the [physical anthropologist](/wiki/Physical_anthropologist "Physical
anthropologist") [Michael Blakey](/wiki/Michael_Blakey_\(anthropologist\)
"Michael Blakey \(anthropologist\)") and his team at [Howard
University](/wiki/Howard_University "Howard University"), a [historically
black college](/wiki/Historically_black_college "Historically black college")
in [Washington, D.C.](/wiki/Washington,_D.C. "Washington, D.C."), for study at
the [Montague Cobb](/wiki/William_Montague_Cobb "William Montague Cobb")
Biological Anthropology Laboratory. This ensured that African-American
students would participate in studies of their ethnic ancestors' remains.[14]

In large part due to activism by the African-American community, which lobbied
the [United States Congress](/wiki/United_States_Congress "United States
Congress") on this project, in October 1992 Congress passed and President
[George H. W. Bush](/wiki/George_H._W._Bush "George H. W. Bush") signed a law
to redesign it in order to stop construction of the pavilion portion of the
site (where the remains had been found) and to appropriate $3 million for a
memorial in that area.[14] The federal building project was redesigned to
preserve part of the archaeological site for this purpose. The southern
portion of the building, slated to be built on the parcel by Duane and Elk
Streets, was eliminated to provide adequate room for a memorial.[14]

The burial ground was listed on the [National Register of Historic
Places](/wiki/National_Register_of_Historic_Places "National Register of
Historic Places") in 1992, as the extent of the burials made it significant
for both regional and national history. Given its importance, GSA proposed
partial mitigation of the adverse effects to the burial ground of the
construction of 290 Broadway, by undertaking programs of data analysis,
curation, and education.[27] In addition, activists lobbied for landmark
status for the burial ground, and gathered 100,000 signatures to send to the
[U.S. Department of the
Interior](/wiki/United_States_Department_of_the_Interior "United States
Department of the Interior"). The ground was designated a [National Historic
Landmark](/wiki/National_Historic_Landmark "National Historic Landmark") in
1993.[14] There was also growing support for a museum on the site to interpret
African-American experience and history in New York.

The discovery and long controversy received national media attention, raising
interest and awareness in public archaeology projects. [Theresa
Singleton](/wiki/Theresa_A._Singleton "Theresa A. Singleton"), an
archaeologist at the [Smithsonian Institution](/wiki/Smithsonian_Institution
"Smithsonian Institution") said,

> The media exposure has created a larger, national audience for this type of
research. I've been called by dozens of scholars and laypeople, all of them
interested in African-American archaeology, all of them curious about why they
don't know more about the field. Until recently, even some black scholars
considered African-American archaeology a waste of time. That's changed
now.[14]

Government and private developers learned about the need to "include
descendant communities in their salvage excavations, especially when human
remains are concerned."[14]

The findings at the burial ground already had highlighted some of the losses
of slavery, as African Americans had not been recently recognized as a major
part of early New York history until then. As the journalist [Edward
Rothstein](/wiki/Edward_Rothstein "Edward Rothstein") wrote, "Among the scars
left by the heritage of slavery, one of the greatest is an absence: where are
the memorials, cemeteries, architectural structures or sturdy sanctuaries that
typically provide the ground for a people’s memory?"[12]

### Site
studies[[edit](/w/index.php?title=African_Burial_Ground_National_Monument&action=edit&section=7
"Edit section: Site studies")]

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/93/Map_of_African_Burial_Ground.jpg/300px-
Map_of_African_Burial_Ground.jpg)](/wiki/File:Map_of_African_Burial_Ground.jpg)

Map showing

[excavated](/wiki/Excavation_\(archaeology\) "Excavation \(archaeology\)")

area and probable location of more intact burials

In total, the intact remains of more than 400 men, women and children of
African descent were found at the site, where they had been buried
individually in wooden boxes. There were no mass burials. Nearly half were
children under 12, indicating the high mortality rate of the time. Historians
and anthropologists estimate that over the decades, as many as 15,000–20,000
Africans were buried in Lower Manhattan. They have determined that this was
the largest colonial-era cemetery for enslaved African people. It is also
"possibly the largest and earliest collection of American colonial remains of
any ethnic group."[14] Some of the burials included items related to African
origins and burial practices.

The work of excavation and study of the remains was considered the "most
important historic urban archaeological project undertaken in the United
States."[7] These remains stand for the estimated tens of thousands of persons
at the burial ground and historically in New York, representing Africans'
"critical" role in "the formation and development of this city and, by
extension, the Nation."[28] Because of its significance to African-American
and United States history, on April 19, 1993, the site was designated a
[National Historic Landmark](/wiki/National_Historic_Landmark "National
Historic Landmark") by the [U.S. Department of the
Interior](/wiki/United_States_Department_of_the_Interior "United States
Department of the Interior").[28][29][30]

As a result of public engagement, the Howard University team identified four
questions which the community hoped to have answered from studies of the
remains:

  * "cultural background and origins of the burial population;
  * the cultural and biological transformations from African to African-American identities;
  * quality of life brought about by enslavement in the Americas; and
  * modes of resistance to enslavement."[31]

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/ed/Silver_pendant-
African_Burial_Ground-NYC.jpg/160px-Silver_pendant-African_Burial_Ground-
NYC.jpg)](/wiki/File:Silver_pendant-African_Burial_Ground-NYC.jpg)

A silver pendant recovered during laboratory cleaning of the skeletal remains
of burial 254 – a child between 3½ and 5½ years old.

Some bodies had items buried with them, as part of personal and cultural
rituals. An example is the silver [pendant](/wiki/Pendant "Pendant") shown at
right. Some heads showed filed teeth, an African ritual decoration. Howard
University did forensic studies, assessing the remains for nutrition, diseases
and indicators of general living conditions for African slaves and free
blacks.

After the Howard University studies were completed, the remains were
reinterred under mounds at the site in October 2003 in a ceremony including
the "Rites of Ancestral Return."[32] The "commemorative ceremony was inclusive
and international in scope, and was organized by GSA and the [Schomburg Center
for Research in Black
Culture](/wiki/Schomburg_Center_for_Research_in_Black_Culture "Schomburg
Center for Research in Black Culture")" of the [New York Public
Library](/wiki/New_York_Public_Library "New York Public Library").[32] This
emotional memorial stretched over multiple cities including [Washington
D.C.](/wiki/Washington_D.C. "Washington D.C."), [Baltimore](/wiki/Baltimore
"Baltimore"), [Philadelphia](/wiki/Philadelphia "Philadelphia"),
[Newark](/wiki/Newark,_New_Jersey "Newark, New Jersey"), and finally
[Manhattan](/wiki/Manhattan "Manhattan"). Thousands attended the reinterment
and commemoration.[32]

##
Memorial[[edit](/w/index.php?title=African_Burial_Ground_National_Monument&action=edit&section=8
"Edit section: Memorial")]

### Construction and
dedication[[edit](/w/index.php?title=African_Burial_Ground_National_Monument&action=edit&section=9
"Edit section: Construction and dedication")]

In consultation with stakeholders, GSA ran a design competition for the site
memorial, which attracted 60 proposals. The winning memorial design by [Rodney
Leon](/wiki/Rodney_Leon "Rodney Leon") in partnership with Nicole Hollant-
Denis, AARRIS Architects, was chosen in June 2004. The work was completed and
dedicated on October 5, 2007.

The memorial design for the 25-foot (7.6 m) [granite](/wiki/Granite "Granite")
monument features a map of the Atlantic area within the "Circle of Diaspora"
in reference to the [Middle Passage](/wiki/Middle_Passage "Middle
Passage"),[33] by which slaves were transported from Africa to North America.
It is built of stone from South Africa and from North America, to symbolize
the two worlds coming together.[34] _The Door of Return_ , refers to "[The
Door of No Return](/wiki/The_Door_of_No_Return "The Door of No Return")", a
name given to slave ports set up for involvement with the age-old local
institution of slavery on the coast of [West Africa](/wiki/West_Africa "West
Africa"), from which so many people were transported after sale by their
native chiefs, never to see their homeland again. The memorial is designed to
reconnect ethnic African Americans to their ancestors' origins.[34]

On February 27, 2006, President [George W. Bush](/wiki/George_W._Bush "George
W. Bush") signed a proclamation designating the burial site as the 123rd
[National Monument](/wiki/U.S._National_Monument "U.S. National
Monument").[35] It was transferred to the operating jurisdiction of the
[National Park Service](/wiki/National_Park_Service "National Park Service")
as its 390th unit. The NPS runs the visitors center, built in 2010, and
arranges for various cultural exhibitions and events at the site throughout
the year. The memorial was dedicated in 2007 in a ceremony presided over by
Mayor [Michael Bloomberg](/wiki/Michael_Bloomberg "Michael Bloomberg") and the
poet [Maya Angelou](/wiki/Maya_Angelou "Maya Angelou").[34] As part of the
dedication ceremonies, the city officially renamed Elk Street as African
Burial Ground Way.[36]

### Visitor
Center[[edit](/w/index.php?title=African_Burial_Ground_National_Monument&action=edit&section=10
"Edit section: Visitor Center")]

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/35/African_Burial_Ground-
aerial_view-NYC.jpg/325px-African_Burial_Ground-aerial_view-
NYC.jpg)](/wiki/File:African_Burial_Ground-aerial_view-NYC.jpg)

[Aerial view](/wiki/Aerial_view "Aerial view")

of the African Burial Ground National Monument. The mounds to the right
contain the reinterred remains.

In February 2010, a visitor center for the African Burial Ground National
Monument opened in the Ted Weiss Federal Building at 290 Broadway, which was
built over part of the archaeological site.[12] The visitor center includes a
permanent exhibit, "Reclaiming Our History," on the significance of the burial
site. Created by Amaze Design, it features a life-sized tableau by Studio EIS
depicting a dual funeral for an adult and child. Other parts of the exhibit
explore the work life of Africans in early New York and connection to national
history, as well as the late 20th-century community success in preserving the
burial ground. The visitor center includes a 40-person theater and a shop.[12]

In addition to earning designation of the site as a [National Historic
Landmark](/wiki/National_Historic_Landmark "National Historic Landmark") and
[National Monument](/wiki/National_Monument "National Monument"), the
discoveries of the African Burial Ground have changed thinking about early
African-American history in New York and the nation. Many new books have been
published on this topic. In 2005 the [New-York Historical Society](/wiki/New-
York_Historical_Society "New-York Historical Society") mounted its first
exhibit ever on slavery in New York;[16] the planned six-month run was
extended into 2007 because of its popularity.

When the visitor center at the burial ground opened in 2010, Edward Rothstein
wrote,

> A revision in popular understanding has taken place about slavery's history
in New York City, evident in several recent books and an impressive series of
shows at the [New-York Historical Society](/wiki/New-York_Historical_Society
"New-York Historical Society"). In the 18th century slaves may have
constituted a quarter of the New York workforce, making this city one of the
colonies' largest slave-holding urban centers.[12]

## See
also[[edit](/w/index.php?title=African_Burial_Ground_National_Monument&action=edit&section=12
"Edit section: See also")]

##
References[[edit](/w/index.php?title=African_Burial_Ground_National_Monument&action=edit&section=13
"Edit section: References")]

  1. **^** ["Listing of acreage as of December 31, 2011"](https://irma.nps.gov/Stats/FileDownload/107). Land Resource Division, National Park Service. Retrieved  2012-03-18.
  2. **^** ["NPS Annual Recreation Visits Report"](https://irma.nps.gov/Stats/Reports/National). National Park Service. Retrieved  2012-03-18.
  3. **^** [National Park Service](/wiki/National_Park_Service "National Park Service") (2010-07-09). ["National Register Information System"](http://nrhp.focus.nps.gov/natreg/docs/All_Data.html). _[National Register of Historic Places](/wiki/National_Register_of_Historic_Places "National Register of Historic Places")_. National Park Service.
  4. **^** ["African Burial Ground National Park Service"](http://www.nps.gov/afbg/index.htm).
  5. **^** ["African Burial Ground National Monument"](http://www.nps.gov/afbg/index.htm). [National Park Service](/wiki/National_Park_Service "National Park Service").
  6. **^** [http://go.galegroup.com/ps/retrieve.do?tabID=T003&resultListType=RESULT_LIST&searchId=R2&searchType=BasicSearchForm&currentPosition=1&userGroupName=cuny_hunter&inPS=true&sort=RELEVANCE&contentSegment=&prodId=GVRL&contentSet=GALE%7CCX3444700025&&docId=GALE%7CCX3444700025&docType=GALE](http://go.galegroup.com/ps/retrieve.do?tabID=T003&resultListType=RESULT_LIST&searchId=R2&searchType=BasicSearchForm&currentPosition=1&userGroupName=cuny_hunter&inPS=true&sort=RELEVANCE&contentSegment=&prodId=GVRL&contentSet=GALE%7CCX3444700025&&docId=GALE%7CCX3444700025&docType=GALE)
  7. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ [_African Burial Ground_](http://www.gsa.gov/africanburialground), General Services Administration. Retrieved 10 February 2012
  8. **^** ["African burial Museum"](http://www.nps.gov/afbg/index.htm).
  9. **^** <https://tribecacitizen.com/2016/09/05/city-building-to-get-residential-makeover/>
  10. **^** <https://www.nbcnewyork.com/news/local/Anti-Black-Racial-Slur-Defaces-Historic-NY-Burial-Ground-499493721.html>
  11. **^** [Ansel Judd Northrup: Slavery in New York: a historical sketch. p.247](https://books.google.com/books?id=6GFMAAAAYAAJ&pg=PA250&dq=Paul+d'+Angola&hl=en&sa=X&ei=-plCT--aFcPl0QGZwsHVBw&ved=0CEYQ6AEwBA#v=onepage&q=Paul%20d'%20Angola&f=false)
  12. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ _**g**_ Rothstein, Edward (26 February 2010). ["A Burial Ground and Its Dead Are Given Life"](https://www.nytimes.com/2010/02/26/arts/design/26burial.html). _The New York Times_. [Archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20100302214226/http://www.nytimes.com/2010/02/26/arts/design/26burial.html) from the original on 2 March 2010. Retrieved  1 March 2010.
  13. **^** [Freeman Hunt: _The Merchants' Magazine and Commercial Review_](https://books.google.com/books?id=siNOAAAAYAAJ&pg=PA166&dq=1741+burned+at+the+stake+magazine+street&hl=en&sa=X&ei=l302T_jIFIHi0gHO2uikAg&sqi=2&ved=0CDYQ6AEwAQ#v=onepage&q&f=false), Volume 27; p. 166 (1852)
  14. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ _**g**_ _**h**_ _**i**_ _**j**_ _**k**_ _**l**_ _**m**_ _**n**_ _**o**_ _**p**_ _**q**_ _**r**_ _**s**_ [Spencer P.M. Harrington, "Bones and Bureaucrats"](http://www.archaeology.org/online/features/afrburial/), _Archaeology_ , March/April 1993. Retrieved 11 February 2012
  15. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ ["The Hidden History of Slavery in New York"](http://www.thenation.com/doc/20051107/slavery_in_new_york). _The Nation_. Retrieved  2008-02-11. "In 1991 excavators for a new federal office building in Manhattan unearthed the remains of more than 400 Africans stacked in wooden boxes sixteen to twenty-eight feet below street level."
  16. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ ["Exhibit: Slavery in New York, 7 October 2005 – 26 March 2006"](http://www.slaveryinnewyork.org/). New-York Historical Society. 2005. [Archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20080215010433/http://www.slaveryinnewyork.org/) from the original on 15 February 2008. Retrieved  2008-02-11.
  17. **^** [Campbell Gibson, "Population of the 24 Urban Places: 1790"](https://www.census.gov/population/www/documentation/twps0027/tab02.txt), _POPULATION OF THE 100 LARGEST CITIES_ AND OTHER URBAN PLACES IN THE UNITED STATES: 1790 TO 1990 _, US Census Bureau, 15 June 1998, 12 February 2012_
  18. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ ["African American Voting Rights"](http://www.archives.nysed.gov/education/showcase/201011afamvoting/index.shtml) [Archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20101109220448/http://www.archives.nysed.gov/education/showcase/201011afamvoting/index.shtml) 2010-11-09 at the [Wayback Machine](/wiki/Wayback_Machine "Wayback Machine"), New York State Archives. Retrieved 11 February 2012
  19. **^** Charles Zebina Lincoln: _The Constitutional History of New York,_ Lawyers Cooperative Publishing Company (1906), p.658 [[1]](https://books.google.com/books?id=Rn44AAAAIAAJ&pg=PA658&dq=1817+statute+new+york+slavery+emancipation+day&hl=en&sa=X&ei=yns2T9vzEqbg0QGZnuShAg&ved=0CEQQ6AEwAw#v=onepage&q=1817%20statute%20new%20york%20slavery%20emancipation%20day&f=false)
  20. **^** Mary L. Booth, _History of the City of New York_ , pg. 363, W. R. C. Clark & Meeker, New York 1859
  21. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ ["Skeletons in Broadway Gruesome Find in a Building Excavation"](https://www.newspapers.com/image/135285460/?terms=bones%2B%22reade%2Bstreet%22). _Democrat and Chronicle_. Rochester, New York. 1897-06-27. Retrieved  2017-06-16.
  22. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ ["The Old Gemmel House"](https://www.newspapers.com/image/78350857/). _New York Tribune_. New York. 1897-07-25. Retrieved  2017-05-20.
  23. **^** ["Dug Up Human Bones Ghastly Find of Workmen Excavating at Broadway and Reade Street, New York"](https://www.newspapers.com/image/50442066/?terms=bones%2B%22reade%2Bstreet%22). _The Brooklyn Daily Eagle_. Brooklyn, NY. 1897-06-27. Retrieved  2017-06-16.
  24. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ ["Several Skulls Found Argument Held as to Whether They Were Indians or Dutch"](https://www.newspapers.com/image/20340592/?terms=bones%2B%22reade%2Bstreet%22). _The New York Times_. New York. 1897-06-27.
  25. **^** ["New York Federal Buildings"](https://www.gsa.gov/about-us/regions/welcome-to-the-northeast-caribbean-region-2/buildings-and-facilities/new-york-federal-buildings). _[U.S. General Services Administration](/wiki/U.S._General_Services_Administration "U.S. General Services Administration")_. [U.S. Government](/wiki/U.S._Government "U.S. Government"). Retrieved  21 November 2018.
  26. **^** ["Unearthed"](https://web.archive.org/web/20120424234043/http://www.africanburialground.gov/Documents/Brochure_Unearthed.pdf) (PDF). _African Burial Ground National Monument_. Archived from [the original](http://www.africanburialground.gov/Documents/Brochure_Unearthed.pdf) (PDF) on 24 April 2012.
  27. **^** ABG Final Report, Archaeology, Chapter 1, p. 6
  28. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ ["African Burial Ground"](http://tps.cr.nps.gov/nhl/detail.cfm?ResourceId=2156&ResourceType=Site). _National Historic Landmark summary listing_. National Park Service. 2007-09-14. Retrieved  10 February 2012. "The more than 400 individuals whose remains have been recovered from this site represent a much larger population whose role in the formation and development of this city and, by extension, the Nation, is critical."
  29. **^** Jean Howson and Gale Harris (November 9, 1992). ["National Register of Historic Places Registration: African Burial Ground"](https://npgallery.nps.gov/NRHP/GetAsset/NHLS/93001597_text). National Park Service.
  30. **^** ["National Register of Historic Places Registration: African Burial Ground—Accompanying 11 photos from 1992"](https://npgallery.nps.gov/NRHP/GetAsset/NHLS/93001597_photos). National Park Service. November 8, 1992.
  31. **^** ["Final Reports: _Archaeology Report_ "](https://web.archive.org/web/20120927155425/http://www.gsa.gov/graphics/regions/Vol2-Part1-TheArchaeologyOfTheNYABG.pdf) (PDF). _African Burial Ground_. General Services Administration. **1** : 6. February 2006. Archived from [the original](http://www.gsa.gov/graphics/regions/Vol2-Part1-TheArchaeologyOfTheNYABG.pdf) (PDF) on 27 September 2012. Retrieved 12 February 2012.
  32. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ ["Reinterment"](https://web.archive.org/web/20101114084318/http://www.africanburialground.gov/abg_main.htm). _African Burial Ground_. General Services Administration. Archived from [the original](http://www.africanburialground.gov/ABG_Main.htm) on 14 November 2010. Retrieved  10 February 2012.
  33. **^** ["Rodney Leon Tapped to Design National Historic Landmark; Winner to Create Memorial for 17th, 18th-Century Africans"](https://web.archive.org/web/20060718042427/http://www.exodusnews.com/HISTORY/History025.htm). Exodus News. May 6, 2005. Archived from [the original](http://www.exodusnews.com/HISTORY/History025.htm) on July 18, 2006. Retrieved  2007-10-06.
  34. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ ["New York opens slave burial site"](http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/americas/7031142.stm). BBC News. October 6, 2007. [Archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20071011005507/http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/americas/7031142.stm) from the original on 11 October 2007. Retrieved  2007-10-06. "The late 18th Century burial site was gradually built over as New York expanded, but was rediscovered during an excavation in 1991. Some 400 remains, many of children, were found during excavations. Half of the remains found at the burial site were of children under the age of 12."
  35. **^** ["National Monuments Numbered"](http://www.nps.gov/history/archaeology/sites/antiquities/fullMap.htm). National Park Service. [Archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20071019033532/http://www.nps.gov/history/archaeology/sites/antiquities/fullMap.htm) from the original on 19 October 2007. Retrieved  2007-10-05.
  36. **^** ["African Burial Ground Memorial Opening Events"](http://www.lowermanhattan.info/news/african_burial_ground_memorial_73099.aspx). [Lower Manhattan Development Corporation](/wiki/Lower_Manhattan_Development_Corporation "Lower Manhattan Development Corporation"). October 1, 2007. [Archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20071011083447/http://lowermanhattan.info/news/african_burial_ground_memorial_73099.aspx) from the original on 11 October 2007. Retrieved  2007-10-06.

## Further
reading[[edit](/w/index.php?title=African_Burial_Ground_National_Monument&action=edit&section=14
"Edit section: Further reading")]

  * Blakey, M.L. 1997. _The New York African Burial Ground Project: an examination of enslaved lives, a construction of ancestral ties,_ Briefing prepared for the Sub-commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities Commission on Human Rights, United Nations. Delivered at the Palais des Nations, Geneva Switzerland, 19 August.
  * Blakely, M.L. 1996. "Howard University research reaches a new plateau," _Newsletter of the African Burial Ground and Five Points Archaeological Project,_ 1 (10):3–7.
  * Epperson, T.W. 1997. "The politics of "race" and cultural identity at the African Burial Ground excavations, New York City," _World Archaeological Bulletin,_ 7:108–117.
  * Foote, T.W., M. Carey, J. Giesenberg-Haag, J. Grey, K. McKoy, and C. Todd. 1993. "Report on Site-Specific History of Block 154," Written for the African Burial Ground Research Project. New York.
  * Gathercole, P. and D. Lowenthal, eds. 1994. _The Politics of the Past,_ New York: Routledge.
  * Gero, J. and M.W. Conkey. 1993a. _Engendering Archaeology: Women and Prehistory_ , Basil Blackwell.
  * Gero, J. and M.W. Conkey. 1993b. "Tensions, pluralities and engendering archaeology," In Gero, J. and M.W. Coney, ed. _Engendering Archaeology: Women and Prehistory,_ pp. 3–31. Basil Blackwell.
  * Howson, J.E. 1992. "The Foley Square Project: An 18th century cemetery in New York City," _African American Archaeology_ , Newsletter No. 6, Spring. pp. 3–4.
  * Jaffe, S.H. 1995. " 'This Infernal Traffic': New York Port and the illegal slave trade." _Seaport: New York's History Magazine_ 29 (3):36–37.
  * Jamieson, R.W. 1995. "Material culture and social death: African-American burial practices," _Historical Archaeology,_ 29 (4):39–58.
  * [Jill Lepore](/wiki/Jill_Lepore "Jill Lepore"), _New York Burning: Liberty, Slavery and Conspiracy in Eighteenth-Century Manhattan_ (Knopf, 2005), about the 1741 slave revolt
  * Perry, W. and R. Paynter. "Epilogue: Artifacts, Ethnicity and the Archaeology of African Americans," In Singleton, T., ed. _We Too Are America: Essays in African American Archaeology,_ Charlottesville, VA: University Press of Virginia.
  * Satchel, M. 1997. "Only remember us: skeletons of slaves from a New York grave bear witness," _U.S. News and World Report,_ July 28:51 and 54.
  * Singleton, T.A. 1995. "The Archaeology of Slavery in North America," in _Annual Review of Anthropology,_ Vol. 24, pp. 119–140.
  * Taylor, R. 1992. "Land of the blacks," _Newsday_ (New York), 6 February 1992, p. 60.
  * Thompson, R.F. 1983. _Flash of the Spirit: African and Afro-American Art and Philosophy,_ New York: Vintage.
  * White, S. 1988. "We dwell in safety and pursue our honest callings: free blacks in New York City, 1783–1810," _The Journal of American History_ , 75 (2):445–470.
  * Will, G. 1991. "Salvage archaeology in Manhattan offers a perspective about America," _Hartford Courant_.
  * Wilson, S. 1996. _Citations on the New York African Burial Ground 1991–1996,_ (3rd Ed.) Compiled by the Office of Public Education and Interpretation of the African Burial Ground. New York City.

##  External
links[[edit](/w/index.php?title=African_Burial_Ground_National_Monument&action=edit&section=15
"Edit section: External links")]

