---
title: "Fungal Lightning" 
date: 2020-05-08 
draft: false 
---

Story source:

http://www.bldgblog.com/2020/05/fungal-lightning/


![](https://i2.wp.com/www.bldgblog.com/wp-
content/uploads/2020/05/shiitakeracktunnel3.jpg?w=840)[Image: The [mushroom
tunnel of Mittagong](http://www.bldgblog.com/2009/09/the-mushroom-tunnel-of-
mittagong/), photo by [Nicola Twilley](http://www.ediblegeography.com/), via
[BLDGBLOG](http://www.bldgblog.com/2009/09/the-mushroom-tunnel-of-
mittagong/).]

“Japanese researchers are closing in on understanding why electrical storms
have a positive influence on the growth of some fungi,” [_Physics
World_](https://physicsworld.com/a/artificial-lightning-strikes-encourage-
growth-of-shiitake-mushrooms/) reported last month, with some interesting
implications for agriculture.

These electrical storms do not have to be nearby, and they do not even need to
be natural: “In a series of experiments, Koichi Takaki at Iwate University and
colleagues showed that artificial lightning strikes do not have to directly
strike shiitake mushroom cultivation beds to promote growth.” Instead, it
seems one can coax mushrooms into fruiting using even just the indirect
presence of electrical fields.

As the article explains, “atmospheric electricity has long been known to boost
the growth of living things, including plants, insects and rats,” but
mushrooms appear to respond even to regional electrical phenomena—for example,
when a distant lightning storm rolls by. “In Takaki’s previous studies, yield
increases were achieved by running a direct current through a shiitake
mushroom log. But Takaki still wondered—why do natural electric storms
indirectly influenced [sic] the growth of mushrooms located miles away from
the lightning strikes?”

Whether or not power lines or electricity-generation facilities, such as power
plants, might also affect—or even catalyze—mushroom growth is not clear.

For now, Takaki is hoping to develop some kind of electrical-stimulation
technique for mushroom growth, with an eye on the global food market.

![](https://i0.wp.com/www.bldgblog.com/wp-
content/uploads/2020/05/tesla-1.jpg?w=840)[Image: Nikola Tesla, perhaps
daydreaming of mushrooms; courtesy Wellcome Library.]

It is quite astonishing to imagine that, someday, those mushrooms you’re
eating in a gourmet pasta dish were grown inside some sort of wild, Nikola
Tesla-like electrical cage, half _X-Men_ , half food-technology of the near-
future—underground shining domes of fungal power.

![](https://i1.wp.com/www.bldgblog.com/wp-
content/uploads/2020/05/shiitakeracktunnel4.jpg?w=840)[Image: The [mushroom
tunnel of Mittagong](http://www.bldgblog.com/2009/09/the-mushroom-tunnel-of-
mittagong/), photo by [Nicola Twilley](http://www.ediblegeography.com/), via
[BLDGBLOG](http://www.bldgblog.com/2009/09/the-mushroom-tunnel-of-
mittagong/).]

The opening image of this post, meanwhile, is from a surreal field trip I took
back in 2009 with Nicola Twilley to visit the “[mushroom tunnel of
Mittagong](http://www.bldgblog.com/2009/09/the-mushroom-tunnel-of-
mittagong/),” a disused rail tunnel in southeast Australia that is—or, as of
2009, was—used as a subterranean mushroom-growth facility. Imagine this tunnel
quietly pulsing with electricity in the darkness, humid, strobing, its wet
logs fruiting with directed fungi.

Electrical mushroom-control techniques, or where the future of food production
merges imperceptibly with the world of H.P. Lovecraft.

![](https://i2.wp.com/www.bldgblog.com/wp-
content/uploads/2020/05/shiitakeracktunnel1.jpg?w=840)[Image: The [mushroom
tunnel of Mittagong](http://www.bldgblog.com/2009/09/the-mushroom-tunnel-of-
mittagong/), photo by [Nicola Twilley](http://www.ediblegeography.com/), via
[BLDGBLOG](http://www.bldgblog.com/2009/09/the-mushroom-tunnel-of-
mittagong/).]

Read a bit more over at [_Physics
World_](https://physicsworld.com/a/artificial-lightning-strikes-encourage-
growth-of-shiitake-mushrooms/).

### _Related_

