---
title: Rebrand, Kick Off, Go – An Inside Account into Our Startup’s Roadmap 
date: 2019-05-22 
draft: false 
---

Story source:

https://medium.com/innovo42/rebrand-kick-off-go-an-inside-account-into-our-start-ups-roadmap-cdf80f0bff03


### 1\. Branding

#### • Revamping the website to create a stronger identity

Entrepreneurs and executives know that a strong identity is the foundation of
a good company, which is why we wanted to start on the right foot and question
why we do what we do and translate the answers into tangible accomplishments.

Before we decided to push new ideas out, we wanted to take a few steps back
and establish a good level of brand consistency.

We kicked off this process by asking ourselves key questions pertaining to the
definitive aspects of our business, as well as to the more abstract ones like
our mission and vision.

Today, many companies might be tempted to skip this step because it may look
like something that fluffs up the business. However, defining all of these
elements in an organized manner before you establish online and social
presence will bridge the gap between your company and customers, ensure
commitment, and bring clarity and direction to your team in the long run.

In our case, we asked ourselves some basic yet powerful questions such as:

  *  **Who are we? How can we describe what we do to someone unfamiliar with the industry in a nutshell?**
  *  **What are our mission and values?**
  *  **Why was this company established and how do we help companies?**
  *  **What products do we provide, how, and where?**

We believe that consistency in visual and written messaging reinforces our
business’ integrity, assuring customers we are trustworthy and here to stay.

When we started, we had an identity system that wasn’t quite evolving with the
business. But although we had visual and stylistics inconsistencies across
logos and the website, we knew it was only a matter of time until we made our
look feel more like “us”.

As a first step, we created a proper brand guideline, revamped the entire
website, came up with the user interface design, created new logos, and
brought everything to life through unique, playful illustrations. As we are a
team of creatives, we want to push the limits of what’s possible by thinking
out of the box and coming up with ideas that challenge the status quo.

By giving our website a new look and feel, we felt we could better align
ourselves to our core values and eventually see how this step changes the way
we work in the long run.

And the best part here was that our solution engineer [Sanjay
Nelagadde](https://medium.com/@sanjaynelagadde1992) has done this
implementation seamlessly and at a much faster pace than usual, bringing the
whole experience to the next level.

As a small start-up, time and speed are crucial factors, which is why
iterations and deployment need to be done rapidly.

Generally, deployment is usually a troublesome process that can take up days,
but with a low-code platform, we can deliver assets faster and in a more
sustainable way.

> By working with a low-code platform, we have managed to create an agile and
seamless experience for our development process, re-designing the website much
faster. Sanjay Nelagadde, Solution Engineer at Innovo42

