---
title: On Prismo Data Loss 
date: 2019-05-22 
draft: false 
---

Story source:

https://fediverse.blog/~/Prismo/on-prismo-data-loss


Sooooo - it happened. Nightmare of all the developers on this planet. Entire
production database of [prismo.news](https://prismo.news) has been
accidentally wiped out and it was fully my fault. In this article, i'm gonna
try to analyze what happened, how i got here and what can i do to prevent such
stuff from happening ever again. This post is gonna be totally technical so if
you don’t care or don’t have time to read that, long story short is - **make
damn sure your backups are properly configured!**

As a side note - i'm definitely not a writer nor a native speaker so please be
polite. That's probably the longest thing i wrote since high school :)

* * *

## Server setup

Back in the days (about a year ago) when Primo was just a dozen of days old, I
decided to go for hosting it on DigitalOcean droplet. I was using DO for
everything hosting-related so far so that was a natural choice.

I’ve set up a VPS, provisioned first Primo deployment, bought an account on
wasabi for blob storage and, last but not least, configured DO’s automatic
daily backups. Everything was working perfectly well for month or two, there
was a shiny new backup waiting to be restored in cause of any failure every
morning.

Then, out of nowhere, completely unnecessary change occurred - I just
discovered a hosting company called UpCloud (btw. pretty popular in the
fediverse afaik). Pricing tier and VPS params were pretty much the same but
they had this super intriguing custom SSD solution for fast IO I wanted to
test badly. And I did that - I decided to move primo.news to UpCloud. There
was nothing really bad about that decision apart from the fact i fu*ked up the
operation by forgetting to take the crucial step. I moved the files, I cloned
the database, I migrated the secrets but…I forgot to setup daily backups for
my new VPS in UpCloud panel. How is that possible? How could i forgot such
thing? That question will remain unanswered as I have absolutely no idea.

## Git workflows

After several months of prismo.news working totally fine, another milestone
has been reached. Till that day, primo development was based on a simplest
workflow possible. There was a `master` branch with the most current version
of codebase and merge requests with all the features being implemented.

Such workflow is fine when there is one developer working on a repo and if
there is no much traction in the project + you don't need to think a lot about
versioning and hotfixing.

After short discussion, we decided it would be a good idea to move our
workflow to a thing called Git flow. I'm not gonna elaborate on that as there
are a lot of better sources of knowledge about that on the internet but, in
short, instead of having one single main (`master`) branch, repo has two main
branches

  * `master` for current stable codebase
  * `dev` for semi-stable more up-to-date version of the codebase.

Additionally, merge requests are being merged into `dev` while merges from
`dev` to `master` are reserved for version releases.

![Git
flow](https://fediverse.blog/static/media/EF82AA5C-3999-6D1D-9911-EB7043FFC931.png)

When we switched to git flow, Prismo 0.4.0 has been already released and i was
working on a 0.5.x feature called _Design system_. At this point, i already
knew it will take me a lot of time to complete it so there was no sense in
changing the branch from which prismo.news instance was being deployed from.
0.4.0 was on `master`, prismo.news was deployed from `master` and i was
standing in front of a potentially month-or-so-long feature so i did not
bother to switch production instance to `dev`.

## Docker setup

Prismo's officially supported way of hosting and deploying is using a provided
`docker-compose.yml` config file. For simplicity's sake.

Every technical dependency of Prismo is handled by that file - which is Redis
and Postgresql at the time of writing this. In order to make the data of such
dependency persistent between deploys and restarts, user needs to mount the
data volume of such container into the host filesystem. That's an optional
commented-out line in the `docker-compose.yml` file both for redis and
postgresql services (it's commented out as each person would probably want to
mount it in his own path of choice).

Sadly, the default value for Prismo docker-compose config file is `./postgres`
for the PostgreSQL (PostgreSQL holds entire data of everything posted on
Prismo) which resolves to the directory this file is in - which is a root of
the application.

As prismo.news is being deployed from the git `master` (instead of prebuilt
docker images), entire application directory on production environment is
controlled by git. Including the `./postgres` directory. Well, at least that's
how it was back when i was provisioning Prismo on a DigitalOcean for the very
first time. Back then, i saw `./postgres` directory is not listed in
`.gitignore` file so git is listing it as untracked directory - i hotfixed it
directly on the server, added the missing line and, it seems so, i forgot to
commit that change to the main repo. So the `.gitignore` change was living
only on production server.

## 0.5.0.rc1 💥

After a month of struggle with the new custom frontend framework feature - i
finally merged it into `dev` just like the new git workflow told us to do. I
marked this release as `0.5.0.rc1` and wanted to deploy it to production as
fast as possible so users could test it and report any bugs.

I ssh-ed into the server, checked what's going on in there and found out that,
just like i wrote earlier, prismo.news is still using `master` branch. Without
any second thoughts (i had backups configured through the hosting company UI
right? what can go wrong?), i triggered `git pull` and `git checkout dev`
and...that's precisely when all hard work done by prismo.news users through a
year has been wiped. In a blink of an eye.

I don't fully understand why that happened (will investigate it more, i
promise) but, as i wrote, `./postgres` directory containing entire data of
prismo.news has been added to `.gitignore` locally on `master` branch so it
was properly ignored since i did that fix. However, after running `git
checkout dev`, codebase has been changed to the version pulled from the repo
and there were no `.gitignore` entry about the `./postgres` directory locally
anymore. That's the part i don't fully get but it seems the checkout removed
the directory for some reason and running `docker-compose up` after that
recreated the directory from scratch. If there is anyone reading this who
understands what happened or what might happened, i would be more than happy
to read what you have to say regarding that incident.

I was sure this situation can be fixed by restoring a morning backup but...it
turned out i forgot to migrate the backup settings from DigitalOcean to
UpCloud months ago while being totally sure they are working fine.

## Summary

What i screwed up:

  * I forgot to configure backups on UpCloud
  * I did not made a manual backup of database directory before the deploy/branch switch
  * I forgot to commit `./postgres` to `.gitignore`
  * I kept the database directory mounted along all the git-controlled application files

## Upcoming difficulties

There are two main difficulties on our way right now. First one is a problem
of duplicated ids of prismo.news posts and comments. They were just a plain
incremented integers propagated to entire fediverse. Starting from scratch
means the ids are starting from 0 again which creates a duplication across the
fediverse and might cause data desynchronization on the entire network.
Simplest solution would be to bump the database indexes to not start from 0
but from the last known ID but that does not solve the core of this issue.
Such incident can happen to anyone in the future, people are forgetting
things, databases are being deleted by accident - Prismo needs to be prepared
for that. That's why we're gonna move from integer IDs to GUIDs which are a
unique sequence of 32 chars ([read more
here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universally_unique_identifier)). This way,
even after starting from scratch, no duplication could happen.

Second difficulty, much heavier than the first, is a loss of your trust and
loss of valuable content posted prismo.news through this year. I deeply regret
of what happened and i hope we can work together and rebuild this cool place
without looking back. I'm so sorry this happened.

PS. Proper backup solution is gonna be the first thing i will configure on the
new setup. PS2. prismo.news is not gonna be revived until this ID/GUID issue
is resolved.

