---
title: "Avoid Choosing an Oscilloscope Based on Bandwidth Alone" 
date: 2020-05-18 
draft: false 
---

Story source:

https://blog.digilentinc.com/dont-choose-oscilloscope-based-bandwidth-alone/


When choosing an oscilloscope, it is critical to make sure that you find the
perfect balance of quality and performance. Considering the massive spectrum
in the price of these devices, it is worth the extra time to make sure you can
get a scope with the most relevant features in your price range.

One of the biggest misconceptions about choosing an oscilloscope is that you
should choose based on bandwidth alone. While bandwidth is important, it is
not the most important consideration, nor the only one to think about. The
reason this is assumed actually comes from the origins of oscilloscopes
themselves. Before there were mixed signal oscilloscopes and mixed domain
oscilloscopes all over the market (and at inexpensive pricing) all you had
were basic scopes as an option. So all the specs you _could_ care about were
bandwidth, sample rate, and channel number. For clarification, most
oscilloscopes are just analog, so they do not have digital capabilities. If
the device can do both (like the Analog Discovery 2), it is referred to as a
mixed signal oscilloscope.

Though it is important to make sure that your oscilloscope has an adequate
bandwidth for your application, choosing an oscilloscope based on bandwidth
alone can result in overspending, or finding a scope with high bandwidth, but
its other specifications may not meet the application requirements. You may
also miss out on other functionality that can prove more useful than just an
oscilloscope, such as a logic analyzer, spectrum analyzer, etc.

In addition to being a mixed signal oscilloscope, the Analog Discovery 2 has
16 digital inputs and outputs (including a logic analyzer, pattern generator,
etc) which makes it more multipurpose, since most applications are not just
digital or analog. It is also a mixed domain oscilloscope, as it includes a
network analyzer and spectrum analyzer so one can examine signals in the
frequency domain. This means that in addition to the traditional oscilloscope
you also get a logic analyzer, impedance analyzer, network analyzer capable of
plotting frequency and magnitude plots, and much more.

![](https://blog.digilentinc.com/wp-
content/uploads/2019/04/40364801005_75ff06e3c7_k-1-678x1024.jpg)

  
Other important specifications to consider include **resolution** and **sample
rate.** Without adequate sample rate, the signals at the top of the bandwidth
may experience aliasing and as a result, be unusable. Without a proper
resolution, the data may not show small enough differences.

Many scopes that feature high bandwidth and sample rate are only 8-bit, while
other scopes (like the Analog Discovery 2) have a much higher resolution
(14-bit).

![](https://blog.digilentinc.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/aa-1024x550.png)

  
The Analog Discovery 2 is a great example of how bandwidth is an important
feature, but should not be the only consideration. Despite having what may
seem like limited bandwidth (up to 30MHz) when compared to other pure
oscilloscopes, the Analog Discovery 2 is a better fit for a wide range of
applications, especially debugging and checking the specifications of a
design.

![](https://blog.digilentinc.com/wp-
content/uploads/2019/04/29070815018_bb44e686ac_h-1024x606.jpg)

  
Since traditional oscilloscopes are single instrument tools, the 12 different
instruments offered on the Analog Discovery 2 make it an excellent choice as a
Swiss Army knife for your bench. It can make a great supplement to your
benchtop equipment or help you determine which applications will require you
to commit to a higher-end expensive tool. You can test out your application
with the Analog Discovery 2, and then you will know when you need to invest in
a single instrument benchtop version of that device.

