---
title: "Why This Started in Minneapolis" 
date: 2020-06-05 
draft: false 
---

Story source:

https://www.citylab.com/equity/2020/06/george-floyd-protest-minneapolis-history-racism-minnesota/612481/


![photo: Police in riot gear march down Plymouth Avenue during riots in North
Minneapolis on July 21,
1967.](https://cdn.theatlantic.com/thumbor/eiI4P1vrKwbybPOxD3xjor63jS8=/300x128/https://cdn.citylab.com/media/img/citylab/2020/06/GettyImages_576821208/original.jpg)
Police in riot gear march down Plymouth Avenue during riots in North
Minneapolis on July 21, 1967. Minnesota Historical Society/CORBIS/Corbis via
Getty Images

# Why This Started in Minneapolis

## Conditions that led to George Floyd’s death are not unique to Minneapolis
and St. Paul. But there’s a reason why the Twin Cities triggered a national
uprising.

Police officer Derek Chauvin killed George Floyd near the intersection of
Chicago Avenue and East 38th Street in Minneapolis, but the protests that have
erupted in response to his death have rippled worldwide. From Riverton,
Wyoming, to Flatbush, Brooklyn — and now in Paris, London, and other European
capitals — communities have risen up in a shared rage that speaks to the
universality of police violence and the inequities that feed it.

Minneapolis, however, stands out as the site where it all began. The city’s
history of disparate policing, and the ways racism and division molded its
physical landscape, might help us understand why.

Minneapolis is at once considered one of the most livable cities in the
country, and the one with some of the greatest racial disparities in housing
and income and education. There’s a dissonance, locals say, between its
progressive rhetoric and the reality of how people of different races
experience completely different cities. This local paradox is a microcosm of
the statewide “Minnesota Paradox,” a term coined by University of Minnesota
economist Samuel L. Myers Jr., to highlight the often-ignored inequality that
defines the region.

CityLab spoke with five experts on race, culture, and state and local history
to understand how they’ve experienced these divides, and how to bridge them.
Our conversations have been edited and condensed.

**William D. Green, history professor at Augsberg University:** Back in 1860,
even though Minnesota was free soil and had in its constitution a ban against
slavery, slaveholders would come to Minnesota to vacation.

Abolitionists brought one slave woman to court and freed her, and what
resulted was a riot in the city. For the next four or five months, neighbors
in Minneapolis walked the streets with loaded weapons, waiting for their
neighbors to provoke them.

And what averted that pending crisis was when the Confederates attacked Fort
Sumter and started the Civil War. Minnesotans shifted their focus away from
their neighbors — what got them to change their focus was joining up.
Minnesota was the first state to send volunteers into the Union Army.

So you have this strange situation, where people were willing to defend a
slaveholder’s right to hold a slave in Minnesota, despite what the state law
said, and they were also willing to join up and fight to preserve the Union.

**Daniel Bergin, documentary filmmaker for Twin Cities PBS:** This paradox
goes to the very founding of the state: the colonization and the displacement
of Dakota and Ojibwe, which is its own complex and deep and insidious story.

Literally, when they were founding the state, there were two constitutions:
One that made a statement against slavery. And then another that didn’t.

**Green:** After the war, Minnesotans tried three times to pass a law that
would extend the voting rights to black men. And on the third attempt, they
succeeded — before the 15th Amendment was ratified. Just months after that,
the legislature passed a law saying that any school system in Minnesota that
segregated on the basis of race would lose all state funding. And then they
also began to see black people serve on juries, which was something that had
never happened in Minnesota. This is all before 1870.

“Policymakers and the body politic lived in parallel worlds with regard to
race relations.”

And then right after that, nothing happened. It was like the progressives and
the friends of black people took their feet off the pedal and began to coast
in complacence on their good deeds. Even though Minnesota would later pass two
or three public accommodations laws banning banning segregation and
discrimination in public settings, you still had discrimination being carried
out by white shopkeepers and restaurateurs and whatnot, denying or harassing
black patronage.

What that represents is that policymakers did high-minded things, but they did
not push down that sense of enlightenment into the body politic. Policymakers
and the body politic lived in parallel worlds with regard to race relations.

By the end of the century, the reputation of Minnesota across the nation was
that Minnesota at least was racially tolerant, but what was not being
addressed was the fact that the black population in Minnesota is exceedingly
small. And what that meant was there were not a lot of black people around to
test the social customs that permitted segregation to continue, and
discrimination to exist.

**Taiyon J. Coleman, a** **ssistant professor of English literature at St.
Catherine University in St. Paul:** After I moved to the state, I wrote an
essay, “Disparate Impacts: Moving to Minnesota to Live Just Enough for the
City,” which appeared in the anthology “[A Good Time for the Truth: Race in
Minnesota](https://www.mnhs.org/mnhspress/books/good-time-truth).” At the end
of the essay, I say, “There are Confederate flags everywhere, even if you
can’t see them.” That’s what I would say about Minnesota. There are good
people here. It’s a good place to live: There are parks, and recreation, and
this notion of public interest for the public good. But there’s this
undercurrent of Minnesota niceness that is very homogenized. You see that in
housing, in education, in employment, in net wealth, in incarceration — we
have the largest racial disparities in the nation. And with those disparities,
there’s a culture that people don’t want to look at it.

You can’t imagine how frustrating it is. I have all the degrees, all the
things that U.S.A. society has said I need to have in order to access
citizenship — what I loosely call whiteness, because whiteness is a
constructed identity — but that is still never enough. That still never
protects you. And that’s what the paradox is. You’ve achieved all this, and
you have these things, but it doesn’t make you safe. Even with my privilege, I
still don’t have access to that.

**Green:** People are surprised by the depth of anger and grievance when a
police officer abuses an African American or kills an African American and
there’s a human cry in the community. Many people in Minnesota and even in
Minneapolis are surprised at the intensity of the anger. What that tells me is
that to a large extent, even though this is, for the most part, a
progressive/liberal city, it’s also a city in which the races live in parallel
universes. It is possible for white people to have no contacts at all with
blacks unless they have kids in the schools, or at my university, or they’re
in the military, or prison.

**Kirsten Delegard, co-founder of Mapping Prejudice, which tracks racial
housing covenants in Minneapolis:** In the early part of the 20th century,
Minneapolis was not trying to market itself as a model progressive metropolis.
It was quite the opposite: In 1946, the city was named the “[anti-Semitism
capital of the United States](https://www.mprnews.org/story/2017/10/18/anti-
semitism-in-minneapolis-history).” It actually had a profound reputation for
intolerance, and there was a very powerful group here that brutally repressed
all labor organizing.

It was in response to that very bad publicity in the ‘30s and ‘40s that you
have this young mayor by the name of [Hubert
Humphrey](https://www.history.com/topics/1960s/hubert-h-humphrey) who’s
elected and makes his political career on trying to change the racial climate
of Minneapolis.

He launches what was hailed at the time as this really innovative sociological
experiment with these black sociologists and tries to get every Minneapolitan
to do a self-audit of their own feelings about race, and all their
organizations’ practices about race. This experiment really puts Minneapolis
on the map as this progressive metropolis — but it was all about feelings, it
was all about attitude. It did nothing to address the material conditions of
life for black people. When I read those reports from the 1940s I was really
struck by the fact that while they had people do all these rankings of their
attitudes, there was basically a passing reference to the fact that 40% of the
city at least had been restricted by these racial covenants.

Racial covenants are a legal clause that specifies that land can never be
occupied or sold to anyone who’s not white. The first one that Mapping
Prejudice has found was [introduced in Minneapolis in
1910](https://www.citylab.com/equity/2020/01/minneapolis-history-housing-
discrimination-mapping-prejudice/604105/). Before that moment, Minneapolis was
not a particularly segregated place. But after, racial covenants were in use
for 40 years. A lot of these contemporary disparities that are so pronounced
and brutal have roots in the history of deliberate efforts to make sure that
all land in the city remained in the control of white people.

**Bergin:** You start to see this map taking place, where black folks and
other people of color couldn’t buy, couldn’t build, weren’t allowed to even
occupy. Then, as history shows us, the redlining that the Federal Housing
Authority implemented during the Depression literally follows these profiles
and these boundaries and barriers in terms of what neighborhoods were worthy
of investing in and underwriting loans in. What we learned recently is that it
wasn’t just informal patterns of occupancy — it’s all based on the systemic
racism of the 19th century. And then it shows up later in the 20th century, in
terms of the growing disparities.

“This is how segregation works in Minneapolis: It re-inscribes the racial
stereotypes, because it keeps peaceful people isolated.”

 **Delegard:** You could tell the story that I told you about almost any
American city: Racial covenants are not unique to Minneapolis, redlining’s not
unique, white violence is not unique, real estate steering is not unique to
Minneapolis. But the way they were used has created a different environment
here.

When they first started to be used, there were just very few African Americans
in this city. Because the restrictions were adopted in such a universal,
overwhelming way, where so much of the land as it developed in the city
throughout the 20th century was just off-limits to anyone who was not white —
the fact that that happened at a really critical moment in the city’s history
in the way that it did really created a different geography of intolerance in
this city, a segregation of opportunity.

Because of that, it became very, very hard for African Americans to find a
place to live and buy a home — and very hard to buy a home where they could
actually amass wealth over time, rather than homeownership being a financial
burden.

**Shannon Smith Jones, executive director of the[nonprofit affordable housing
organization Hope Community](http://hope-community.org): **We can tout this as
a really great space to live. Minnesota _is_ absolutely beautiful: We do have
beautiful parks, we have walkable places, bikable places, all of these lakes.
But who and how we get to access those things has always been a part of it.
Green spaces look different [in North
Minneapolis](http://www.minnpost.com/mnopedia/2020/01/how-near-north-came-to-
be-one-of-minneapolis-largest-black-communities/) than they do in other parts
of the city. Even up until recently, when they started [investing in inner-
city parks](https://nextcity.org/daily/entry/minneapolis-funding-its-parks-
with-an-eye-to-equity), there are huge disparities in what parks look like in
North Minneapolis vs. Southwest Minneapolis. There’s been a value laid in the
infrastructures that have allowed for those that succeed and those who that
don’t to be held along the racial lines.

**Coleman:** I want to say this: Blackness is complicated. It’s not just
color. It’s also what class you are, where you live, what you look like, where
you work. I have a colleague who lives in St. Paul, who told me [last week]
that the police were outside her house in riot gear with bullhorns telling
them to stay inside and not come out of the house. Where I live, in the
Nokomis neighborhood, that wasn’t happening at all. Would that ever have
happened to Mr. Floyd if he was in my neighborhood?

I would argue that this is how segregation works in Minneapolis or Minnesota:
It re-inscribes the racial stereotypes, because it keeps peaceful people
isolated, so that not only are they the other, but then I’m convinced they’re
the other, because I never see them where I live. When that police officer was
doing that to Floyd, yes, he should be held accountable, but he could not get
away with his actions if other people were not complicit in allowing him to do
that.

When people are othered, you can watch a man kill in front of your face and
literally not see it. You can be in a room with different people, and based
upon your skin color, your geography, where you grew up, where you live,
you’re going to see something completely different. This is a symptom of a
bigger systemic disease. We need to get justice for Mr. Floyd — but we got a
big problem, because [Chauvin] couldn’t get away with what he did if we didn’t
have a culture that perpetuated that type of action and made it possible.

**Green:** George Floyd’s death is not a turning point in policing. Right
after the [passage of the black suffrage law in
Minnesota](https://www.mnopedia.org/event/african-american-suffrage-
minnesota-1868) [in 1868], there was an article that appeared in the newspaper
of note saying that in police court, we have a lot of “unsavories,” and they
used the n-word. It was an example of — and a reflection — of the
disproportionate arrests of African Americans. We’re talking about a small
population, and yet per capita, more blacks were arrested for crimes for which
white people who committed the same crimes were not arrested for.

Then you also have a series of incidents where cops were especially brutal to
African Americans who were detained or who they were seeking to arrest. Again,
we’re talking 19th century, but to read the events of those arrests, you might
as well be looking at what just happened on 38th and Chicago.

And of course, the message conveyed there is that these cops are doing their
job because the African American is a threat to social order. And that the
cops are given the license, to manhandle, and to be abusive of the black
miscreants. That sensibility has been in Minnesota, just beneath the surface,
since the Civil War.

**Bergin:** There is a lot we can learn from movements of the past, and I
think it’s kind of urgent, in fact, because what we need to get to is the
community-building that follows. We had unrest in Minneapolis in the late
1960s, as many Northern cities did. And now we can see what resulted: Some
spaces and places and people never healed. And then — there’s the paradox
again — there were also really really powerful outcomes that were were black-
led in solidarity with others.

After the [Northside riots in ’67](https://www.mnopedia.org/event/civil-
unrest-plymouth-avenue-minneapolis-1967), white businessmen and others,
together with black leadership said, “what can we do?” And they formed this
organization called the [Metropolitan Economic Development
Association](http://meda.net/) — an incubator that helps to educate and
hopefully launch minority- and women-owned businesses. That organization is
still here today, still helping diverse businesses get off the ground and
supporting them. It is an outgrowth of the disruptions of the late 60s.

[Another outgrowth] is the election to mayor of a former cop and head of the
Minneapolis Police Federation, Charles Stenvig. He was a late-‘60s law-and-
order proponent and got elected because of some of the civil unrest — he ran
on the catchphrase, “[taking the handcuffs off the Minneapolis
police](https://books.google.com/books?id=sxplc2S0EzUC&pg=PT108&lpg=PT108&dq=taking+the+handcuffs+off+Minneapolis+police+stenvig&source=bl&ots=hfw_NCynvH&sig=ACfU3U3S4U5Z-rSaPwReGDyj8iOyYXYkXg&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwjc2eLai-
npAhUsGTQIHXOVD70Q6AEwAXoECAoQAQ#v=onepage&q=taking%20the%20handcuffs%20off%20Minneapolis%20police%20stenvig&f=false).”
You had political leadership emerging out of police culture.

**Coleman:** When the governor was saying, “We have to get back to normal,” I
know he was well meaning and well intentioned, but that scared me. I said,
“No, this _is_ normal for black people.” You’re always afraid.

As Mr. Floyd’s choking out on the street, think about Covid. People of color
are [[three] times](https://www.apmresearchlab.org/covid/deaths-by-race) more
likely to die from Covid. They’re being choked out the same way — they, too,
cannot breathe. And are we seeing it? Is it important, or is it business as
usual? States are reopening. People are going around as if it’s no big deal.
Because we’ve been socialized to say those deaths, those bodies, those people
don’t matter.

I don’t condone what the protesters did. But if that is the metaphor for
equality and enfranchisement, people of color are always on fire.

#### About the Author

![Sarah
Holder](https://cdn.theatlantic.com/thumbor/06H8jLXKsmrPTLbw6sV8dO59rqY=/87x0:3558x3648/59x62/https://cdn.citylab.com/media/None/sarah_2/original.jpg)

[Sarah Holder](https://www.citylab.com/authors/sarah-holder/) is a staff
writer at CityLab covering local policy, housing, labor, and technology.

