---
title: "Gaia Hypothesis" 
date: 2019-05-23 
draft: false 
---

Story source:

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gaia_hypothesis


Hypothesis that living organisms interact with their surroundings in a self-
regulating system

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/97/The_Earth_seen_from_Apollo_17.jpg/220px-
The_Earth_seen_from_Apollo_17.jpg)](/wiki/File:The_Earth_seen_from_Apollo_17.jpg)

The study of planetary habitability is partly based upon extrapolation from
knowledge of the

[Earth](/wiki/Earth "Earth")

's conditions, as the Earth is the only planet currently known to harbour
life.

The **Gaia hypothesis** ( , , ), also known as the **Gaia theory** or the
**Gaia principle** , proposes that living [organisms](/wiki/Organism
"Organism") interact with their [inorganic](/wiki/Inorganic_compound
"Inorganic compound") surroundings on [Earth](/wiki/Earth "Earth") to form a
[synergistic](/wiki/Synergy "Synergy") and [self-regulating](/wiki/Homeostasis
"Homeostasis"), [complex system](/wiki/Complex_system "Complex system") that
helps to maintain and perpetuate the conditions for [life](/wiki/Life "Life")
on the planet.

The hypothesis was formulated by the chemist [James
Lovelock](/wiki/James_Lovelock "James Lovelock")[1] and co-developed by the
microbiologist [Lynn Margulis](/wiki/Lynn_Margulis "Lynn Margulis") in the
1970s.[2] Lovelock named the idea after [Gaia](/wiki/Gaia_\(mythology\) "Gaia
\(mythology\)"), the primordial goddess who personified the Earth in [Greek
mythology](/wiki/Greek_mythology "Greek mythology"). In 2006, the [Geological
Society of London](/wiki/Geological_Society_of_London "Geological Society of
London") awarded Lovelock the [Wollaston Medal](/wiki/Wollaston_Medal
"Wollaston Medal") in part for his work on the Gaia hypothesis.[3]

Topics related to the hypothesis include how the [biosphere](/wiki/Biosphere
"Biosphere") and the [evolution](/wiki/Evolution "Evolution") of organisms
affect the stability of [global temperature](/wiki/Global_temperature "Global
temperature"), [salinity](/wiki/Salinity "Salinity") of
[seawater](/wiki/Seawater "Seawater"), [atmospheric
oxygen](/wiki/Atmospheric_oxygen "Atmospheric oxygen") levels, the maintenance
of a [hydrosphere](/wiki/Hydrosphere "Hydrosphere") of liquid water and other
environmental variables that affect the [habitability of
Earth](/wiki/Habitability_of_Earth "Habitability of Earth").

The Gaia hypothesis was initially criticized for being
[teleological](/wiki/Teleological "Teleological") and against the principles
of [natural selection](/wiki/Natural_selection "Natural selection"), but later
refinements aligned the Gaia hypothesis with ideas from fields such as [Earth
system science](/wiki/Earth_system_science "Earth system science"),
[biogeochemistry](/wiki/Biogeochemistry "Biogeochemistry") and [systems
ecology](/wiki/Systems_ecology "Systems ecology").[4][5][6] Lovelock also once
described the "geophysiology" of the Earth.[7][ _[further explanation
needed](/wiki/Wikipedia:Please_clarify "Wikipedia:Please clarify")_ ] Even so,
the Gaia hypothesis continues to attract criticism, and today some scientists
consider it to be only weakly supported by, or at odds with, the available
evidence.[8][9][10]

## Overview[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Gaia_hypothesis&action=edit&section=1
"Edit section: Overview")]

Gaian hypotheses suggest that organisms [co-evolve](/wiki/Co-evolution "Co-
evolution") with their environment: that is, they "influence their
[abiotic](/wiki/Abiotic "Abiotic") environment, and that environment in turn
influences the [biota](/wiki/Biota_\(ecology\) "Biota \(ecology\)") by
[Darwinian process](/wiki/Darwinism "Darwinism")". Lovelock (1995) gave
evidence of this in his second book, showing the evolution from the world of
the early [thermo-acido-philic](/wiki/Bacteria "Bacteria") and [methanogenic
bacteria](/wiki/Methanogenic_bacteria "Methanogenic bacteria") towards the
oxygen-enriched [atmosphere](/wiki/Atmosphere "Atmosphere") today that
supports more [complex life](/wiki/Phanerozoic "Phanerozoic").

A reduced version of the hypothesis has been called "influential Gaia"[11] in
"Directed Evolution of the Biosphere: Biogeochemical Selection or Gaia?" by
Andrei G. Lapenis, which states the [biota](/wiki/Biota_\(ecology\) "Biota
\(ecology\)") influence certain aspects of the abiotic world, e.g.
[temperature](/wiki/Temperature "Temperature") and atmosphere. This is not the
work of an individual but a collective of Russian scientific research that was
combined into this peer reviewed publication. It states the coevolution of
life and the environment through “micro-forces”[11] and biogeochemical
processes. An example is how the activity of
[photosynthetic](/wiki/Photosynthesis "Photosynthesis") bacteria during
Precambrian times have completely modified the [Earth
atmosphere](/wiki/Earth%27s_atmosphere "Earth's atmosphere") to turn it
aerobic, and as such supporting evolution of life (in particular
[eukaryotic](/wiki/Eukaryotic "Eukaryotic") life).

Since barriers existed throughout the Twentieth Century between Russia and the
rest of the world, it is only relatively recently that the early Russian
scientists who introduced concepts overlapping the Gaia hypothesis have become
better known to the Western scientific community.[11] These scientists
include:

  1. [Piotr Alekseevich Kropotkin](/wiki/Piotr_Kropotkin "Piotr Kropotkin") (1842–1921)
  2. Rafail Vasil’evich Rizpolozhensky (1847–1918)
  3. [Vladimir Ivanovich Vernadsky](/wiki/Vladimir_Ivanovich_Vernadsky "Vladimir Ivanovich Vernadsky") (1863–1945)
  4. Vladimir Alexandrovich Kostitzin (1886–1963)

Biologists and Earth scientists usually view the factors that stabilize the
characteristics of a period as an undirected [emergent
property](/wiki/Emergent_property "Emergent property") or
[entelechy](/wiki/Entelechy "Entelechy") of the system; as each individual
species pursues its own self-interest, for example, their combined actions may
have counterbalancing effects on environmental change. Opponents of this view
sometimes reference examples of events that resulted in dramatic change rather
than stable equilibrium, such as the conversion of the Earth's atmosphere from
a [reducing environment](/wiki/Reducing_environment "Reducing environment") to
an [oxygen](/wiki/Oxygen "Oxygen")-rich one at the end of the
[Archaean](/wiki/Archean "Archean") and the beginning of the
[Proterozoic](/wiki/Proterozoic "Proterozoic") periods.

Less accepted versions of the hypothesis claim that changes in the biosphere
are brought about through the [coordination of living
organisms](/wiki/Superorganism "Superorganism") and maintain those conditions
through [homeostasis](/wiki/Homeostasis "Homeostasis"). In some versions of
[Gaia philosophy](/wiki/Gaia_philosophy "Gaia philosophy"), all lifeforms are
considered part of one single living planetary being called _Gaia_. In this
view, the atmosphere, the seas and the terrestrial crust would be results of
interventions carried out by Gaia through the [coevolving](/wiki/Coevolution
"Coevolution") diversity of living organisms.

The Gaia hypothesis was an influence on the [deep ecology](/wiki/Deep_ecology
"Deep ecology") movement.[12]

## Details[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Gaia_hypothesis&action=edit&section=2
"Edit section: Details")]

The Gaia hypothesis posits that the Earth is a self-regulating [complex
system](/wiki/Complex_system "Complex system") involving the
[biosphere](/wiki/Biosphere "Biosphere"), the
[atmosphere](/wiki/Earth%27s_atmosphere "Earth's atmosphere"), the
[hydrospheres](/wiki/Hydrosphere "Hydrosphere") and the
[pedosphere](/wiki/Pedosphere "Pedosphere"), tightly coupled as an evolving
system. The hypothesis contends that this system as a whole, called Gaia,
seeks a physical and chemical environment optimal for contemporary life.[13]

Gaia evolves through a [cybernetic](/wiki/Cybernetic#In_biology "Cybernetic")
[feedback](/wiki/Feedback "Feedback") system operated unconsciously by the
[biota](/wiki/Biota_\(ecology\) "Biota \(ecology\)"), leading to broad
stabilization of the conditions of habitability in a full homeostasis. Many
processes in the Earth's surface essential for the conditions of life depend
on the interaction of living forms, especially
[microorganisms](/wiki/Microorganisms "Microorganisms"), with inorganic
elements. These processes establish a global control system that regulates
Earth's [surface temperature](/wiki/Sea_surface_temperature "Sea surface
temperature"), [atmosphere composition](/wiki/Atmosphere_composition
"Atmosphere composition") and [ocean](/wiki/Ocean "Ocean")
[salinity](/wiki/Salinity "Salinity"), powered by the global thermodynamic
disequilibrium state of the Earth system.[14]

The existence of a planetary homeostasis influenced by living forms had been
observed previously in the field of [biogeochemistry](/wiki/Biogeochemistry
"Biogeochemistry"), and it is being investigated also in other fields like
[Earth system science](/wiki/Earth_system_science "Earth system science"). The
originality of the Gaia hypothesis relies on the assessment that such
homeostatic balance is actively pursued with the goal of keeping the optimal
conditions for life, even when terrestrial or external events menace them.[15]

### Regulation of global surface
temperature[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Gaia_hypothesis&action=edit&section=3
"Edit section: Regulation of global surface temperature")]

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f5/All_palaeotemps.png/220px-
All_palaeotemps.png)](/wiki/File:All_palaeotemps.png)

Rob Rohde's palaeotemperature graphs

Since life started on Earth, the energy provided by the [Sun](/wiki/Sun "Sun")
has increased by 25% to 30%;[16] however, the surface temperature of the
planet has remained within the levels of habitability, reaching quite regular
low and high margins. Lovelock has also hypothesised that methanogens produced
elevated levels of methane in the early atmosphere, giving a view similar to
that found in petrochemical smog, similar in some respects to the atmosphere
on [Titan](/wiki/Titan_\(moon\) "Titan \(moon\)").[7] This, he suggests tended
to screen out ultraviolet until the formation of the ozone screen, maintaining
a degree of homeostasis. However, the [Snowball Earth](/wiki/Snowball_Earth
"Snowball Earth")[17] research has suggested that "oxygen shocks" and reduced
methane levels led, during the [Huronian](/wiki/Huronian "Huronian"),
[Sturtian](/wiki/Sturtian "Sturtian") and [Marinoan](/wiki/Marinoan
"Marinoan")/[Varanger](/wiki/Cryogenian "Cryogenian") Ice Ages, to a world
that very nearly became a solid "snowball". These epochs are evidence against
the ability of the pre [Phanerozoic](/wiki/Phanerozoic "Phanerozoic")
biosphere to fully self-regulate.

Processing of the greenhouse gas CO2, explained below, plays a critical role
in the maintenance of the Earth temperature within the limits of habitability.

The [CLAW hypothesis](/wiki/CLAW_hypothesis "CLAW hypothesis"), inspired by
the Gaia hypothesis, proposes a [feedback loop](/wiki/Feedback "Feedback")
that operates between [ocean](/wiki/Ocean "Ocean")
[ecosystems](/wiki/Ecosystem "Ecosystem") and the [Earth](/wiki/Earth
"Earth")'s [climate](/wiki/Climate "Climate").[18] The
[hypothesis](/wiki/Hypothesis "Hypothesis") specifically proposes that
particular [phytoplankton](/wiki/Phytoplankton "Phytoplankton") that produce
[dimethyl sulfide](/wiki/Dimethyl_sulfide "Dimethyl sulfide") are responsive
to variations in [climate forcing](/wiki/Climate_forcing "Climate forcing"),
and that these responses lead to a [negative feedback
loop](/wiki/Negative_feedback "Negative feedback") that acts to stabilise the
[temperature](/wiki/Temperature "Temperature") of the [Earth's
atmosphere](/wiki/Earth%27s_atmosphere "Earth's atmosphere").

Currently the increase in human population and the environmental impact of
their activities, such as the multiplication of [greenhouse
gases](/wiki/Greenhouse_gases "Greenhouse gases") may cause [negative
feedbacks](/wiki/Negative_feedback "Negative feedback") in the environment to
become [positive feedback](/wiki/Positive_feedback "Positive feedback").
Lovelock has stated that this could bring an [extremely accelerated global
warming](/wiki/James_Lovelock#The_revenge_of_Gaia "James Lovelock"),[19] but
he has since stated the effects will likely occur more slowly.[20]

#### Daisyworld
simulations[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Gaia_hypothesis&action=edit&section=4
"Edit section: Daisyworld simulations")]

[![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/bf/StandardDaisyWorldRun2color.gif/220px-
StandardDaisyWorldRun2color.gif)](/wiki/File:StandardDaisyWorldRun2color.gif)

Plots from a standard black & white

[Daisyworld](/wiki/Daisyworld "Daisyworld")

simulation

In response to the criticism that the Gaia hypothesis seemingly required
unrealistic [group selection](/wiki/Group_selection "Group selection") and
[cooperation](/wiki/Cooperation_\(evolution\) "Cooperation \(evolution\)")
between organisms, James Lovelock and [Andrew
Watson](/wiki/Andrew_Watson_\(scientist\) "Andrew Watson \(scientist\)")
developed a mathematical model, [Daisyworld](/wiki/Daisyworld "Daisyworld"),
in which [ecological competition](/wiki/Competition_\(biology\) "Competition
\(biology\)") underpinned planetary temperature regulation.[21]

Daisyworld examines the [energy budget](/wiki/Earth%27s_energy_budget "Earth's
energy budget") of a [planet](/wiki/Planet "Planet") populated by two
different types of plants, black [daisies](/wiki/Asteraceae "Asteraceae") and
white daisies, which are assumed to occupy a significant portion of the
surface. The colour of the daisies influences the [albedo](/wiki/Albedo
"Albedo") of the planet such that black daisies absorb more light and warm the
planet, while white daisies reflect more light and cool the planet. The black
daisies are assumed to grow and reproduce best at a lower temperature, while
the white daisies are assumed to thrive best at a higher temperature. As the
temperature rises closer to the value the white daisies like, the white
daisies outreproduce the black daisies, leading to a larger percentage of
white surface, and more sunlight is reflected, reducing the heat input and
eventually cooling the planet. Conversely, as the temperature falls, the black
daisies outreproduce the white daisies, absorbing more sunlight and warming
the planet. The temperature will thus converge to the value at which the
reproductive rates of the plants are equal.

Lovelock and Watson showed that, over a limited range of conditions, this
[negative feedback](/wiki/Negative_feedback "Negative feedback") due to
competition can stabilize the planet's temperature at a value which supports
life, if the energy output of the "sun" changes, while a planet without life
would show wide temperature swings. The percentage of white and black daisies
will continually change to keep the temperature at the value at which the
plants' reproductive rates are equal, allowing both life forms to thrive.

It has been suggested that the results were predictable because Lovelock and
Watson selected examples that produced the responses they desired.[22]

### Regulation of oceanic
salinity[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Gaia_hypothesis&action=edit&section=5 "Edit
section: Regulation of oceanic salinity")]

Ocean [salinity](/wiki/Salinity "Salinity") has been constant at about 3.5%
for a very long time.[23] Salinity stability in oceanic environments is
important as most cells require a rather constant salinity and do not
generally tolerate values above 5%. The constant ocean salinity was a long-
standing mystery, because no process counterbalancing the salt influx from
rivers was known. Recently it was suggested[24] that salinity may also be
strongly influenced by [seawater](/wiki/Seawater "Seawater") circulation
through hot [basaltic](/wiki/Basalt "Basalt") rocks, and emerging as hot water
vents on [mid-ocean ridges](/wiki/Mid-ocean_ridge "Mid-ocean ridge"). However,
the composition of seawater is far from equilibrium, and it is difficult to
explain this fact without the influence of organic processes. One suggested
explanation lies in the formation of salt plains throughout Earth's history.
It is hypothesized that these are created by bacterial colonies that fix ions
and heavy metals during their life processes.[23]

In the biogeochemical processes of Earth, sources and sinks are the movement
of elements. The composition of salt ions within our oceans and seas is:
sodium (Na+), chlorine (Cl−), sulfate (SO42−), magnesium (Mg2+), calcium
(Ca2+) and potassium (K+). The elements that comprise salinity do not readily
change and are a conservative property of seawater.[23] There are many
mechanisms that change salinity from a particulate form to a dissolved form
and back. The known sources of sodium i.e. salts are when weathering, erosion,
and dissolution of rocks are transported into rivers and deposited into the
oceans.

The [Mediterranean Sea](/wiki/Mediterranean_Sea "Mediterranean Sea") as being
Gaia's kidney is found
([here](http://scimar.icm.csic.es/scimar/index.php/secId/6/IdArt/209/)) by
Kenneth J. Hsue, a correspondence author in 2001. The
"[desiccation](/wiki/Desiccation "Desiccation")" of the Mediterranean is the
evidence of a functioning kidney. Earlier "kidney functions" were performed
during the "[deposition](/wiki/Deposition_\(geology\) "Deposition
\(geology\)") of the [Cretaceous](/wiki/Cretaceous "Cretaceous") ([South
Atlantic](/wiki/Atlantic_Ocean "Atlantic Ocean")), [Jurassic](/wiki/Jurassic
"Jurassic") ([Gulf of Mexico](/wiki/Gulf_of_Mexico "Gulf of Mexico")), [Permo-
Triassic](/wiki/Permian%E2%80%93Triassic_extinction_event "Permian–Triassic
extinction event") ([Europe](/wiki/Europe "Europe")),
[Devonian](/wiki/Devonian "Devonian") ([Canada](/wiki/Canada "Canada")),
[Cambrian](/wiki/Cambrian "Cambrian")/[Precambrian](/wiki/Precambrian
"Precambrian") ([Gondwana](/wiki/Gondwana "Gondwana")) saline giants."[25]

### Regulation of oxygen in the
atmosphere[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Gaia_hypothesis&action=edit&section=6
"Edit section: Regulation of oxygen in the atmosphere")]

The Gaia hypothesis states that the Earth's [atmospheric
composition](/wiki/Atmospheric_chemistry#Atmospheric_composition "Atmospheric
chemistry") is kept at a dynamically steady state by the presence of life.[26]
The atmospheric composition provides the conditions that contemporary life has
adapted to. All the atmospheric gases other than [noble gases](/wiki/Noble_gas
"Noble gas") present in the atmosphere are either made by organisms or
processed by them.

The stability of the atmosphere in Earth is not a consequence of [chemical
equilibrium](/wiki/Chemical_equilibrium "Chemical equilibrium").
[Oxygen](/wiki/Oxygen "Oxygen") is a reactive compound, and should eventually
combine with gases and minerals of the Earth's atmosphere and crust. Oxygen
only began to persist in the atmosphere in small quantities about 50 million
years before the start of the [Great Oxygenation
Event](/wiki/Great_Oxygenation_Event "Great Oxygenation Event").[27] Since the
start of the [Cambrian](/wiki/Cambrian "Cambrian") period, atmospheric oxygen
concentrations have fluctuated between 15% and 35% of atmospheric volume.[28]
Traces of [methane](/wiki/Atmospheric_methane "Atmospheric methane") (at an
amount of 100,000 tonnes produced per year)[29] should not exist, as methane
is combustible in an oxygen atmosphere.

Dry air in the [atmosphere of Earth](/wiki/Atmosphere_of_Earth "Atmosphere of
Earth") contains roughly (by volume) 78.09% [nitrogen](/wiki/Nitrogen
"Nitrogen"), 20.95% oxygen, 0.93% [argon](/wiki/Argon "Argon"), 0.039% [carbon
dioxide](/wiki/Carbon_dioxide_in_the_Earth%27s_atmosphere "Carbon dioxide in
the Earth's atmosphere"), and small amounts of other gases including
[methane](/wiki/Methane "Methane"). Lovelock originally speculated that
concentrations of oxygen above about 25% would increase the frequency of
wildfires and conflagration of forests. Recent work on the findings of fire-
caused charcoal in Carboniferous and Cretaceous coal measures, in geologic
periods when O2 did exceed 25%, has supported Lovelock's contention.[
_[citation needed](/wiki/Wikipedia:Citation_needed "Wikipedia:Citation
needed")_ ]

### Processing of
CO2[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Gaia_hypothesis&action=edit&section=7 "Edit
section: Processing of CO2")]

Gaia scientists see the participation of living organisms in the [carbon
cycle](/wiki/Carbon_cycle "Carbon cycle") as one of the complex processes that
maintain conditions suitable for life. The only significant natural source of
[atmospheric carbon dioxide](/wiki/Carbon_dioxide_in_Earth%27s_atmosphere
"Carbon dioxide in Earth's atmosphere") ([CO2](/wiki/Carbon_dioxide "Carbon
dioxide")) is [volcanic activity](/wiki/Volcanic_activity "Volcanic
activity"), while the only significant removal is through the precipitation of
[carbonate rocks](/wiki/Carbonate_rocks "Carbonate rocks").[30] Carbon
precipitation, solution and [fixation](/wiki/Carbon_fixation "Carbon
fixation") are influenced by the [bacteria](/wiki/Bacteria "Bacteria") and
plant roots in soils, where they improve gaseous circulation, or in coral
reefs, where calcium carbonate is deposited as a solid on the sea floor.
Calcium carbonate is used by living organisms to manufacture carbonaceous
tests and shells. Once dead, the living organisms' shells fall to the bottom
of the oceans where they generate deposits of chalk and limestone.

One of these organisms is _[Emiliania huxleyi](/wiki/Emiliania_huxleyi
"Emiliania huxleyi")_ , an abundant [coccolithophore](/wiki/Coccolithophore
"Coccolithophore") [algae](/wiki/Algae "Algae") which also has a role in the
formation of [clouds](/wiki/Cloud "Cloud").[31] CO2 excess is compensated by
an increase of coccolithophoride life, increasing the amount of CO2 locked in
the ocean floor. Coccolithophorides increase the cloud cover, hence control
the surface temperature, help cool the whole planet and favor precipitations
necessary for terrestrial plants.[ _[citation
needed](/wiki/Wikipedia:Citation_needed "Wikipedia:Citation needed")_ ] Lately
the atmospheric CO2 concentration has increased and there is some evidence
that concentrations of ocean [algal blooms](/wiki/Algal_bloom "Algal bloom")
are also increasing.[32]

[Lichen](/wiki/Lichen "Lichen") and other organisms accelerate the
[weathering](/wiki/Weathering "Weathering") of rocks in the surface, while the
decomposition of rocks also happens faster in the soil, thanks to the activity
of roots, fungi, bacteria and subterranean animals. The flow of carbon dioxide
from the atmosphere to the soil is therefore regulated with the help of living
beings. When CO2 levels rise in the atmosphere the temperature increases and
plants grow. This growth brings higher consumption of CO2 by the plants, who
process it into the soil, removing it from the atmosphere.

## History[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Gaia_hypothesis&action=edit&section=8
"Edit section: History")]

### Precedents[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Gaia_hypothesis&action=edit&section=9
"Edit section: Precedents")]

The idea of the Earth as an integrated whole, a living being, has a long
tradition. The [mythical Gaia](/wiki/Gaia_\(mythology\) "Gaia \(mythology\)")
was the primal Greek goddess personifying the [Earth](/wiki/Earth "Earth"),
the Greek version of "[Mother Nature](/wiki/Mother_Nature "Mother Nature")"
(from Ge = Earth, and Aia = [PIE](/wiki/PIE "PIE") grandmother), or the [Earth
Mother](/wiki/Earth_Mother "Earth Mother"). James Lovelock gave this name to
his hypothesis after a suggestion from the novelist [William
Golding](/wiki/William_Golding "William Golding"), who was living in the same
village as Lovelock at the time ([Bowerchalke](/wiki/Bowerchalke
"Bowerchalke"), [Wiltshire](/wiki/Wiltshire "Wiltshire"), UK). Golding's
advice was based on Gea, an alternative spelling for the name of the Greek
goddess, which is used as prefix in geology, geophysics and geochemistry.[33]
Golding later made reference to Gaia in his [Nobel prize](/wiki/Nobel_prize
"Nobel prize") acceptance speech.

In the eighteenth century, as [geology](/wiki/Geology "Geology") consolidated
as a modern science, [James Hutton](/wiki/James_Hutton "James Hutton")
maintained that geological and biological processes are interlinked.[34]
Later, the [naturalist](/wiki/Naturalist "Naturalist") and explorer [Alexander
von Humboldt](/wiki/Alexander_von_Humboldt "Alexander von Humboldt")
recognized the coevolution of living organisms, climate, and Earth's
crust.[34] In the twentieth century, [Vladimir
Vernadsky](/wiki/Vladimir_Vernadsky "Vladimir Vernadsky") formulated a theory
of Earth's development that is now one of the foundations of ecology.
Vernadsky was a Ukrainian [geochemist](/wiki/Geochemist "Geochemist") and was
one of the first scientists to recognize that the oxygen, nitrogen, and carbon
dioxide in the Earth's atmosphere result from biological processes. During the
1920s he published works arguing that living organisms could reshape the
planet as surely as any physical force. Vernadsky was a pioneer of the
scientific bases for the environmental sciences.[35] His visionary
pronouncements were not widely accepted in the West, and some decades later
the Gaia hypothesis received the same type of initial resistance from the
scientific community.

Also in the turn to the 20th century [Aldo Leopold](/wiki/Aldo_Leopold "Aldo
Leopold"), pioneer in the development of modern [environmental
ethics](/wiki/Environmental_ethics "Environmental ethics") and in the movement
for [wilderness](/wiki/Wilderness "Wilderness") conservation, suggested a
living Earth in his biocentric or holistic ethics regarding land.

> It is at least not impossible to regard the earth's parts—soil, mountains,
rivers, atmosphere etc,—as organs or parts of organs of a coordinated whole,
each part with its definite function. And if we could see this whole, as a
whole, through a great period of time, we might perceive not only organs with
coordinated functions, but possibly also that process of consumption as
replacement which in biology we call metabolism, or growth. In such case we
would have all the visible attributes of a living thing, which we do not
realize to be such because it is too big, and its life processes too slow.

>

> —

>

> Aldo Leopold, _Animate Earth_.[36]

Another influence for the Gaia hypothesis and the [environmental
movement](/wiki/Environmental_movement "Environmental movement") in general
came as a side effect of the [Space Race](/wiki/Space_Race "Space Race")
between the Soviet Union and the United States of America. During the 1960s,
the first humans in space could see how the Earth looked as a whole. The
photograph _[Earthrise](/wiki/Earthrise "Earthrise")_ taken by astronaut
[William Anders](/wiki/William_Anders "William Anders") in 1968 during the
[Apollo 8](/wiki/Apollo_8 "Apollo 8") mission became, through the [Overview
Effect](/wiki/Overview_Effect "Overview Effect") an early symbol for the
global ecology movement.[37]

###  Formulation of the
hypothesis[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Gaia_hypothesis&action=edit&section=10
"Edit section: Formulation of the hypothesis")]

Lovelock started defining the idea of a self-regulating Earth controlled by
the community of living organisms in September 1965, while working at the [Jet
Propulsion Laboratory](/wiki/Jet_Propulsion_Laboratory "Jet Propulsion
Laboratory") in California on methods of detecting [life on
Mars](/wiki/Life_on_Mars_\(planet\) "Life on Mars \(planet\)").[38][39] The
first paper to mention it was _Planetary Atmospheres: Compositional and other
Changes Associated with the Presence of Life_ , co-authored with C.E.
Giffin.[40] A main concept was that life could be detected in a planetary
scale by the chemical composition of the atmosphere. According to the data
gathered by the [Pic du Midi observatory](/wiki/Pic_du_Midi_de_Bigorre "Pic du
Midi de Bigorre"), planets like Mars or Venus had atmospheres in [chemical
equilibrium](/wiki/Chemical_equilibrium "Chemical equilibrium"). This
difference with the Earth atmosphere was considered to be a proof that there
was no life in these planets.

Lovelock formulated the _Gaia Hypothesis_ in journal articles in 1972[1] and
1974,[2] followed by a popularizing 1979 book _Gaia: A new look at life on
Earth_. An article in the _[New Scientist](/wiki/New_Scientist "New
Scientist")_ of February 6, 1975,[41] and a popular book length version of the
hypothesis, published in 1979 as _The Quest for Gaia_ , began to attract
scientific and critical attention.

Lovelock called it first the Earth feedback hypothesis,[42] and it was a way
to explain the fact that combinations of chemicals including
[oxygen](/wiki/Oxygen "Oxygen") and [methane](/wiki/Methane "Methane") persist
in stable concentrations in the atmosphere of the Earth. Lovelock suggested
detecting such combinations in other planets' atmospheres as a relatively
reliable and cheap way to detect life.

Later, other relationships such as sea creatures producing sulfur and iodine
in approximately the same quantities as required by land creatures emerged and
helped bolster the hypothesis.[43]

In 1971 [microbiologist](/wiki/Microbiologist "Microbiologist") Dr. [Lynn
Margulis](/wiki/Lynn_Margulis "Lynn Margulis") joined Lovelock in the effort
of fleshing out the initial hypothesis into scientifically proven concepts,
contributing her knowledge about how microbes affect the atmosphere and the
different layers in the surface of the planet.[4] The American biologist had
also awakened criticism from the scientific community with her theory on the
origin of [eukaryotic](/wiki/Eukaryote "Eukaryote")
[organelles](/wiki/Organelle "Organelle") and her contributions to the
[endosymbiotic theory](/wiki/Endosymbiotic_theory "Endosymbiotic theory"),
nowadays accepted. Margulis dedicated the last of eight chapters in her book,
_The Symbiotic Planet_ , to Gaia. However, she objected to the widespread
personification of Gaia and stressed that Gaia is "not an organism", but "an
emergent property of interaction among organisms". She defined Gaia as "the
series of interacting ecosystems that compose a single huge ecosystem at the
Earth's surface. Period". The book's most memorable "slogan" was actually
quipped by a student of Margulis': "Gaia is just symbiosis as seen from
space".

James Lovelock called his first proposal the _Gaia hypothesis_ but has also
used the term _Gaia theory_. Lovelock states that the initial formulation was
based on observation, but still lacked a scientific explanation. The Gaia
hypothesis has since been supported by a number of scientific experiments[44]
and provided a number of useful predictions.[45] In fact, wider research
proved the original hypothesis wrong, in the sense that it is not life alone
but the whole Earth system that does the regulating.[13]

###  First Gaia
conference[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Gaia_hypothesis&action=edit&section=11
"Edit section: First Gaia conference")]

In 1985, the first public symposium on the Gaia hypothesis, _Is The Earth A
Living Organism?_ was held at [University of Massachusetts
Amherst](/wiki/University_of_Massachusetts_Amherst "University of
Massachusetts Amherst"), August 1–6.[46] The principal sponsor was the
[National Audubon Society](/wiki/National_Audubon_Society "National Audubon
Society"). Speakers included James Lovelock, [George Wald](/wiki/George_Wald
"George Wald"), [Mary Catherine Bateson](/wiki/Mary_Catherine_Bateson "Mary
Catherine Bateson"), [Lewis Thomas](/wiki/Lewis_Thomas "Lewis Thomas"), [John
Todd](/wiki/John_Todd_\(Canadian_biologist\) "John Todd \(Canadian
biologist\)"), Donald Michael, [Christopher Bird](/wiki/Christopher_Bird
"Christopher Bird"), [Thomas Berry](/wiki/Thomas_Berry "Thomas Berry"), [David
Abram](/wiki/David_Abram "David Abram"), [Michael
Cohen](/wiki/Michael_A._Cohen "Michael A. Cohen"), and William Fields. Some
500 people attended.[47]

###  Second Gaia
conference[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Gaia_hypothesis&action=edit&section=12
"Edit section: Second Gaia conference")]

In 1988, [climatologist](/wiki/Climatology "Climatology") [Stephen
Schneider](/wiki/Stephen_Schneider "Stephen Schneider") organised a conference
of the [American Geophysical Union](/wiki/American_Geophysical_Union "American
Geophysical Union"). The first Chapman Conference on Gaia,[48] was held in San
Diego, California on March 7, 1988.

During the "philosophical foundations" session of the conference, [David
Abram](/wiki/David_Abram "David Abram") spoke on the influence of metaphor in
science, and of the Gaia hypothesis as offering a new and potentially game-
changing metaphorics, while [James Kirchner](/wiki/James_Kirchner "James
Kirchner") criticised the Gaia hypothesis for its imprecision. Kirchner
claimed that Lovelock and Margulis had not presented one Gaia hypothesis, but
four -

  * [CoEvolutionary](/wiki/Coevolution "Coevolution") Gaia: that life and the environment had evolved in a coupled way. Kirchner claimed that this was already accepted scientifically and was not new.
  * [Homeostatic](/wiki/Homeostatic "Homeostatic") Gaia: that life maintained the stability of the natural environment, and that this stability enabled life to continue to exist.
  * [Geophysical](/wiki/Geophysics "Geophysics") Gaia: that the Gaia hypothesis generated interest in geophysical cycles and therefore led to interesting new research in terrestrial geophysical dynamics.
  * Optimising Gaia: that Gaia shaped the planet in a way that made it an optimal environment for life as a whole. Kirchner claimed that this was not testable and therefore was not scientific.

Of Homeostatic Gaia, Kirchner recognised two alternatives. "Weak Gaia"
asserted that life tends to make the environment stable for the flourishing of
all life. "Strong Gaia" according to Kirchner, asserted that life tends to
make the environment stable, _to enable_ the flourishing of all life. Strong
Gaia, Kirchner claimed, was untestable and therefore not scientific.[49]

Lovelock and other Gaia-supporting scientists, however, did attempt to
disprove the claim that the hypothesis is not scientific because it is
impossible to test it by controlled experiment. For example, against the
charge that Gaia was teleological, Lovelock and Andrew Watson offered the
[Daisyworld](/wiki/Daisyworld "Daisyworld") Model (and its modifications,
above) as evidence against most of these criticisms.[21] Lovelock said that
the Daisyworld model "demonstrates that self-regulation of the global
environment can emerge from competition amongst types of life altering their
local environment in different ways".[50]

Lovelock was careful to present a version of the Gaia hypothesis that had no
claim that Gaia intentionally or consciously maintained the complex balance in
her environment that life needed to survive. It would appear that the claim
that Gaia acts "intentionally" was a metaphoric statement in his popular
initial book and was not meant to be taken literally. This new statement of
the Gaia hypothesis was more acceptable to the scientific community. Most
accusations of [teleologism](/wiki/Teleology "Teleology") ceased, following
this conference.

### Third Gaia
conference[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Gaia_hypothesis&action=edit&section=13
"Edit section: Third Gaia conference")]

By the time of the 2nd Chapman Conference on the Gaia Hypothesis, held at
Valencia, Spain, on 23 June 2000,[51] the situation had changed significantly.
Rather than a discussion of the Gaian teleological views, or "types" of Gaia
hypotheses, the focus was upon the specific mechanisms by which basic short
term homeostasis was maintained within a framework of significant evolutionary
long term structural change.

The major questions were:[52]

  1. "How has the global biogeochemical/climate system called Gaia changed in time? What is its history? Can Gaia maintain stability of the system at one time scale but still undergo vectorial change at longer time scales? How can the geologic record be used to examine these questions?"
  2. "What is the structure of Gaia? Are the feedbacks sufficiently strong to influence the evolution of climate? Are there parts of the system determined pragmatically by whatever disciplinary study is being undertaken at any given time or are there a set of parts that should be taken as most true for understanding Gaia as containing evolving organisms over time? What are the feedbacks among these different parts of the Gaian system, and what does the near closure of matter mean for the structure of Gaia as a global ecosystem and for the productivity of life?"
  3. "How do models of Gaian processes and phenomena relate to reality and how do they help address and understand Gaia? How do results from Daisyworld transfer to the real world? What are the main candidates for "daisies"? Does it matter for Gaia theory whether we find daisies or not? How should we be searching for daisies, and should we intensify the search? How can Gaian mechanisms be investigated using process models or global models of the climate system that include the biota and allow for chemical cycling?"

In 1997, Tyler Volk argued that a Gaian system is almost inevitably produced
as a result of an evolution towards far-from-equilibrium homeostatic states
that maximise [entropy](/wiki/Entropy "Entropy") production, and Kleidon
(2004) agreed stating: "...homeostatic behavior can emerge from a state of MEP
associated with the planetary albedo"; "...the resulting behavior of a biotic
Earth at a state of MEP may well lead to near-homeostatic behavior of the
Earth system on long time scales, as stated by the Gaia hypothesis". Staley
(2002) has similarly proposed "...an alternative form of Gaia theory based on
more traditional Darwinian principles... In [this] new approach, environmental
regulation is a consequence of population dynamics, not Darwinian selection.
The role of selection is to favor organisms that are best adapted to
prevailing environmental conditions. However, the environment is not a static
backdrop for evolution, but is heavily influenced by the presence of living
organisms. The resulting co-evolving dynamical process eventually leads to the
convergence of equilibrium and optimal conditions".

### Fourth Gaia
conference[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Gaia_hypothesis&action=edit&section=14
"Edit section: Fourth Gaia conference")]

A fourth international conference on the Gaia hypothesis, sponsored by the
Northern Virginia Regional Park Authority and others, was held in October 2006
at the Arlington, VA campus of George Mason University.[53]

Martin Ogle, Chief Naturalist, for NVRPA, and long-time Gaia hypothesis
proponent, organized the event. Lynn Margulis, Distinguished University
Professor in the Department of Geosciences, University of Massachusetts-
Amherst, and long-time advocate of the Gaia hypothesis, was a keynote speaker.
Among many other speakers: Tyler Volk, Co-director of the Program in Earth and
Environmental Science at New York University; Dr. Donald Aitken, Principal of
Donald Aitken Associates; Dr. Thomas Lovejoy, President of the Heinz Center
for Science, Economics and the Environment; Robert Correll, Senior Fellow,
Atmospheric Policy Program, American Meteorological Society and noted
environmental ethicist, J. Baird Callicott.

This conference approached the Gaia hypothesis as both science and metaphor as
a means of understanding how we might begin addressing 21st century issues
such as climate change and ongoing environmental destruction.

## Criticism[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Gaia_hypothesis&action=edit&section=15
"Edit section: Criticism")]

After initially being largely ignored by most scientists (from 1969 until
1977), thereafter for a period the initial Gaia hypothesis was criticized by a
number of scientists, such as [Ford Doolittle](/wiki/Ford_Doolittle "Ford
Doolittle"),[54] [Richard Dawkins](/wiki/Richard_Dawkins "Richard
Dawkins")[55] and [Stephen Jay Gould](/wiki/Stephen_Jay_Gould "Stephen Jay
Gould").[48] Lovelock has said that because his hypothesis is named after a
Greek goddess, and championed by many non-scientists,[42] the Gaia hypothesis
was interpreted as a [neo-Pagan](/wiki/Neo-Pagan "Neo-Pagan")
[religion](/wiki/Religion "Religion"). Many scientists in particular also
criticised the approach taken in his popular book _Gaia, a New Look at Life on
Earth_ for being [teleological](/wiki/Teleology "Teleology")—a belief that
things are purposeful and aimed towards a goal. Responding to this critique in
1990, Lovelock stated, "Nowhere in our writings do we express the idea that
planetary self-regulation is purposeful, or involves foresight or planning by
the [biota](/wiki/Biota_\(ecology\) "Biota \(ecology\)")".

[Stephen Jay Gould](/wiki/Stephen_Jay_Gould "Stephen Jay Gould") criticised
Gaia as being "a metaphor, not a mechanism."[56] He wanted to know the actual
mechanisms by which self-regulating homeostasis was achieved. In his defense
of Gaia, David Abram argues that Gould overlooked the fact that "mechanism",
itself, is a metaphor — albeit an exceedingly common and often unrecognized
metaphor — one which leads us to consider natural and living systems as though
they were machines organized and built from outside (rather than as
[autopoietic](/wiki/Autopoiesis "Autopoiesis") or self-organizing phenomena).
Mechanical metaphors, according to Abram, lead us to overlook the active or
agential quality of living entities, while the organismic metaphorics of the
Gaia hypothesis accentuate the active agency of both the biota and the
biosphere as a whole.[57][58] With regard to causality in Gaia, Lovelock
argues that no single mechanism is responsible, that the connections between
the various known mechanisms may never be known, that this is accepted in
other fields of biology and ecology as a matter of course, and that specific
hostility is reserved for his own hypothesis for other reasons.[59]

Aside from clarifying his language and understanding of what is meant by a
life form, Lovelock himself ascribes most of the criticism to a lack of
understanding of non-linear mathematics by his critics, and a linearizing form
of [greedy reductionism](/wiki/Greedy_reductionism "Greedy reductionism") in
which all events have to be immediately ascribed to specific causes before the
fact. He also states that most of his critics are biologists but that his
hypothesis includes experiments in fields outside biology, and that some self-
regulating phenomena may not be mathematically explainable.[59]

### Natural selection and
evolution[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Gaia_hypothesis&action=edit&section=16
"Edit section: Natural selection and evolution")]

Lovelock has suggested that global biological feedback mechanisms could evolve
by [natural selection](/wiki/Natural_selection "Natural selection"), stating
that organisms that improve their environment for their survival do better
than those that damage their environment. However, in the early 1980s, [W.
Ford Doolittle](/wiki/Ford_Doolittle "Ford Doolittle") and [Richard
Dawkins](/wiki/Richard_Dawkins "Richard Dawkins") separately argued against
Gaia. Doolittle argued that nothing in the [genome](/wiki/Genome "Genome") of
individual organisms could provide the feedback mechanisms proposed by
Lovelock, and therefore the Gaia hypothesis proposed no plausible mechanism
and was unscientific.[54] Dawkins meanwhile stated that for organisms to act
in concert would require foresight and planning, which is contrary to the
current scientific understanding of evolution.[55] Like Doolittle, he also
rejected the possibility that feedback loops could stabilize the system.

[Lynn Margulis](/wiki/Lynn_Margulis "Lynn Margulis"), a microbiologist who
collaborated with Lovelock in supporting the Gaia hypothesis, argued in 1999,
that "[Darwin](/wiki/Charles_Darwin "Charles Darwin")'s grand vision was not
wrong, only incomplete. In accentuating the direct competition between
individuals for resources as the primary selection mechanism, Darwin (and
especially his followers) created the impression that the environment was
simply a static arena". She wrote that the composition of the Earth's
atmosphere, hydrosphere, and lithosphere are regulated around "set points" as
in [homeostasis](/wiki/Homeostasis "Homeostasis"), but those set points change
with time.[60]

Evolutionary biologist [W. D. Hamilton](/wiki/W._D._Hamilton "W. D. Hamilton")
called the concept of Gaia [Copernican](/wiki/Nicolaus_Copernicus "Nicolaus
Copernicus"), adding that it would take another [Newton](/wiki/Isaac_Newton
"Isaac Newton") to explain how Gaian self-regulation takes place through
Darwinian [natural selection](/wiki/Natural_selection "Natural
selection").[33][ _[better source needed](/wiki/Wikipedia:NOTRS
"Wikipedia:NOTRS")_ ]

### Criticism in the 21st
century[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Gaia_hypothesis&action=edit&section=17 "Edit
section: Criticism in the 21st century")]

The Gaia hypothesis continues to be broadly skeptically received by the
scientific community. For instance, arguments both for and against it were
laid out in the journal _Climatic Change_ in 2002 and 2003. A significant
argument raised against it are the many examples where life has had a
detrimental or destabilising effect on the environment rather than acting to
regulate it.[8][9] Several recent books have criticised the Gaia hypothesis,
expressing views ranging from "... the Gaia hypothesis lacks unambiguous
observational support and has significant theoretical difficulties"[61] to
"Suspended uncomfortably between tainted metaphor, fact, and false science, I
prefer to leave Gaia firmly in the background"[10] to "The Gaia hypothesis is
supported neither by evolutionary theory nor by the empirical evidence of the
geological record".[62] The [CLAW hypothesis](/wiki/CLAW_hypothesis "CLAW
hypothesis"),[18] initially suggested as a potential example of direct Gaian
feedback, has subsequently been found to be less credible as understanding of
[cloud condensation nuclei](/wiki/Cloud_condensation_nuclei "Cloud
condensation nuclei") has improved.[63] In 2009 the [Medea
hypothesis](/wiki/Medea_hypothesis "Medea hypothesis") was proposed: that life
has highly detrimental (biocidal) impacts on planetary conditions, in direct
opposition to the Gaia hypothesis.[64]

In a recent book-length evaluation of the Gaia hypothesis considering modern
evidence from across the various relevant disciplines the author, Toby
Tyrrell, concluded that: "I believe Gaia is a dead end. Its study has,
however, generated many new and thought provoking questions. While rejecting
Gaia, we can at the same time appreciate Lovelock's originality and breadth of
vision, and recognise that his audacious concept has helped to stimulate many
new ideas about the Earth, and to champion a holistic approach to studying
it".[65] Elsewhere he presents his conclusion "The Gaia hypothesis is not an
accurate picture of how our world works".[66] This statement needs to be
understood as referring to the "strong" and "moderate" forms of Gaia—that the
biota obeys a principle that works to make Earth optimal (strength 5) or
favourable for life (strength 4) or that it works as a homeostatic mechanism
(strength 3). The latter is the "weakest" form of Gaia that Lovelock has
advocated. Tyrrell rejects it. However, he finds that the two weaker forms of
Gaia—Coeveolutionary Gaia and Influential Gaia, which assert that there are
close links between the evolution of life and the environment and that biology
affects the physical and chemical environment—are both credible, but that it
is not useful to use the term "Gaia" in this sense.[67]

## See also[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Gaia_hypothesis&action=edit&section=18
"Edit section: See also")]

## References[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Gaia_hypothesis&action=edit&section=19
"Edit section: References")]

  1. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ J. E. Lovelock (1972). "Gaia as seen through the atmosphere". _[Atmospheric Environment](/wiki/Atmospheric_Environment "Atmospheric Environment")_. **6** (8): 579–580. [Bibcode](/wiki/Bibcode "Bibcode"):[1972AtmEn...6..579L](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1972AtmEn...6..579L). [doi](/wiki/Digital_object_identifier "Digital object identifier"):[10.1016/0004-6981(72)90076-5](//doi.org/10.1016%2F0004-6981%2872%2990076-5).
  2. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Lovelock, J.E.; Margulis, L. (1974). ["Atmospheric homeostasis by and for the biosphere: the Gaia hypothesis"](http://tellusa.net/index.php/tellusa/article/view/9731). _Tellus_. Series A. Stockholm: International Meteorological Institute. **26** (1–2): 2–10. [Bibcode](/wiki/Bibcode "Bibcode"):[1974Tell...26....2L](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1974Tell...26....2L). [doi](/wiki/Digital_object_identifier "Digital object identifier"):[10.1111/j.2153-3490.1974.tb01946.x](//doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.2153-3490.1974.tb01946.x). [ISSN](/wiki/International_Standard_Serial_Number "International Standard Serial Number") [1600-0870](//www.worldcat.org/issn/1600-0870). Retrieved  20 October 2012.
  3. **^** ["Wollaston Award Lovelock"](https://www.geolsoc.org.uk/About/History/Awards-Citations-Replies-2001-Onwards/2006-Awards-Citations-Replies). Retrieved  19 October 2015.
  4. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Turney, Jon (2003). _Lovelock and Gaia: Signs of Life_. UK: Icon Books. [ISBN](/wiki/International_Standard_Book_Number "International Standard Book Number") [ 978-1-84046-458-0](/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-1-84046-458-0 "Special:BookSources/978-1-84046-458-0").
  5. **^** Schwartzman, David (2002). _Life, Temperature, and the Earth: The Self-Organizing Biosphere_. Columbia University Press. [ISBN](/wiki/International_Standard_Book_Number "International Standard Book Number") [ 978-0-231-10213-1](/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-0-231-10213-1 "Special:BookSources/978-0-231-10213-1").
  6. **^** Gribbin, John (1990), "Hothouse earth: The greenhouse effect and Gaia" (Weidenfeld & Nicolson)
  7. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Lovelock, James, (1995) "The Ages of Gaia: A Biography of Our Living Earth" (W.W.Norton & Co)
  8. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Kirchner, James W. (2002), "Toward a future for Gaia theory", _[Climatic Change](/wiki/Climatic_Change_\(journal\) "Climatic Change \(journal\)")_ , **52** (4): 391–408, [doi](/wiki/Digital_object_identifier "Digital object identifier"):[10.1023/a:1014237331082](//doi.org/10.1023%2Fa%3A1014237331082)
  9. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Volk, Tyler (2002), "The Gaia hypothesis: fact, theory, and wishful thinking", _Climatic Change_ , **52** (4): 423–430, [doi](/wiki/Digital_object_identifier "Digital object identifier"):[10.1023/a:1014218227825](//doi.org/10.1023%2Fa%3A1014218227825)
  10. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ [Beerling, David](/wiki/David_Beerling "David Beerling") (2007). [_The Emerald Planet: How plants changed Earth's history_](http://ukcatalogue.oup.com/product/9780192806024.do). Oxford: Oxford University Press. [ISBN](/wiki/International_Standard_Book_Number "International Standard Book Number") [ 978-0-19-280602-4](/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-0-19-280602-4 "Special:BookSources/978-0-19-280602-4").
  11. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Lapenis, Andrei G. (2002). "Directed Evolution of the Biosphere: Biogeochemical Selection or Gaia?". _The Professional Geographer_. **54** (3): 379–391. [doi](/wiki/Digital_object_identifier "Digital object identifier"):[10.1111/0033-0124.00337](//doi.org/10.1111%2F0033-0124.00337) – via [Peer Reviewed Journal].
  12. **^** David Landis Barnhill, Roger S. Gottlieb (eds.), _Deep Ecology and World Religions: New Essays on Sacred Ground_ , SUNY Press, 2010, p. 32.
  13. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Lovelock, James. _The Vanishing Face of Gaia_. Basic Books, 2009, p. 255. [ISBN](/wiki/International_Standard_Book_Number "International Standard Book Number") [978-0-465-01549-8](/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-0-465-01549-8 "Special:BookSources/978-0-465-01549-8")
  14. **^** Kleidon, Axel. _How does the earth system generate and maintain thermodynamic disequilibrium and what does it imply for the future of the planet?_. Article submitted to the _Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society_ on Thu, 10 Mar 2011
  15. **^** Lovelock, James. _The Vanishing Face of Gaia_. Basic Books, 2009, p. 179. [ISBN](/wiki/International_Standard_Book_Number "International Standard Book Number") [978-0-465-01549-8](/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-0-465-01549-8 "Special:BookSources/978-0-465-01549-8")
  16. **^** Owen, T.; Cess, R.D.; Ramanathan, V. (1979). "Earth: An enhanced carbon dioxide greenhouse to compensate for reduced solar luminosity". _[Nature](/wiki/Nature_\(journal\) "Nature \(journal\)")_. **277** (5698): 640–2. [Bibcode](/wiki/Bibcode "Bibcode"):[1979Natur.277..640O](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1979Natur.277..640O). [doi](/wiki/Digital_object_identifier "Digital object identifier"):[10.1038/277640a0](//doi.org/10.1038%2F277640a0).
  17. **^** Hoffman, P.F. 2001. [_Snowball Earth theory_](http://www.snowballearth.org)
  18. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ [Charlson, R. J.](/wiki/Robert_Jay_Charlson "Robert Jay Charlson"), [Lovelock, J. E](/wiki/James_Lovelock "James Lovelock"), Andreae, M. O. and Warren, S. G. (1987). ["Oceanic phytoplankton, atmospheric sulphur, cloud albedo and climate"](http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v326/n6114/abs/326655a0.html). _Nature_. **326** (6114): 655–661. [Bibcode](/wiki/Bibcode "Bibcode"):[1987Natur.326..655C](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1987Natur.326..655C). [doi](/wiki/Digital_object_identifier "Digital object identifier"):[10.1038/326655a0](//doi.org/10.1038%2F326655a0). CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list ([link](/wiki/Category:CS1_maint:_Multiple_names:_authors_list "Category:CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list"))
  19. **^** Lovelock, James. _The Vanishing Face of Gaia_. Basic Books, 2009, [ISBN](/wiki/International_Standard_Book_Number "International Standard Book Number") [978-0-465-01549-8](/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-0-465-01549-8 "Special:BookSources/978-0-465-01549-8")
  20. **^** Lovelock J., NBC News. [Link](http://worldnews.nbcnews.com/_news/2012/04/23/11144098-gaia-scientist-james-lovelock-i-was-alarmist-about-climate-change?lite) Published 23 April 2012, accessed 22 August 2012.[ _[dead link](/wiki/Wikipedia:Link_rot "Wikipedia:Link rot")_ ]
  21. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Watson, A.J.; Lovelock, J.E (1983). "Biological homeostasis of the global environment: the parable of Daisyworld". _Tellus_. **35B** (4): 286–9. [Bibcode](/wiki/Bibcode "Bibcode"):[1983TellB..35..284W](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1983TellB..35..284W). [doi](/wiki/Digital_object_identifier "Digital object identifier"):[10.1111/j.1600-0889.1983.tb00031.x](//doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.1600-0889.1983.tb00031.x).
  22. **^** Kirchner, James W. (2003). "The Gaia Hypothesis: Conjectures and Refutations". _Climatic Change_. **58** (1–2): 21–45. [doi](/wiki/Digital_object_identifier "Digital object identifier"):[10.1023/A:1023494111532](//doi.org/10.1023%2FA%3A1023494111532).
  23. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Segar, Douglas (2012). _The Introduction to Ocean Sciences_. <http://www.reefimages.com/oceans/SegarOcean3Chap05.pdf>: Library of Congress. pp. Chapter 5 3rd Edition. [ISBN](/wiki/International_Standard_Book_Number "International Standard Book Number") [ 978-0-9857859-0-1](/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-0-9857859-0-1 "Special:BookSources/978-0-9857859-0-1").
  24. **^** Gorham, Eville (1 January 1991). "Biogeochemistry: its origins and development". _Biogeochemistry_. Kluwer Academic. **13** (3): 199–239. [doi](/wiki/Digital_object_identifier "Digital object identifier"):[10.1007/BF00002942](//doi.org/10.1007%2FBF00002942). [ISSN](/wiki/International_Standard_Serial_Number "International Standard Serial Number") [1573-515X](//www.worldcat.org/issn/1573-515X).
  25. **^** <http://www.webviva.com>, Justino Martinez. Web Viva 2007. ["Scientia Marina: List of Issues"](http://scimar.icm.csic.es/scimar/index.php/secId/6/IdArt/209/). _scimar.icm.csic.es_. Retrieved  2017-02-04.
  26. **^** Lovelock, James. _The Vanishing Face of Gaia_. Basic Books, 2009, p. 163. [ISBN](/wiki/International_Standard_Book_Number "International Standard Book Number") [978-0-465-01549-8](/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-0-465-01549-8 "Special:BookSources/978-0-465-01549-8")
  27. **^** Anbar, A.; Duan, Y.; Lyons, T.; Arnold, G.; Kendall, B.; Creaser, R.; Kaufman, A.; Gordon, G.; Scott, C.; Garvin, J.; Buick, R. (2007). "A whiff of oxygen before the great oxidation event?". _Science_. **317** (5846): 1903–1906. [Bibcode](/wiki/Bibcode "Bibcode"):[2007Sci...317.1903A](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2007Sci...317.1903A). [doi](/wiki/Digital_object_identifier "Digital object identifier"):[10.1126/science.1140325](//doi.org/10.1126%2Fscience.1140325). [PMID](/wiki/PubMed_Identifier "PubMed Identifier") [17901330](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17901330).
  28. **^** Berner, R. A. (Sep 1999). ["Atmospheric oxygen over Phanerozoic time"](http://www.pnas.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=10500106). _Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America_. **96** (20): 10955–10957. [Bibcode](/wiki/Bibcode "Bibcode"):[1999PNAS...9610955B](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1999PNAS...9610955B). [doi](/wiki/Digital_object_identifier "Digital object identifier"):[10.1073/pnas.96.20.10955](//doi.org/10.1073%2Fpnas.96.20.10955). [ISSN](/wiki/International_Standard_Serial_Number "International Standard Serial Number") [0027-8424](//www.worldcat.org/issn/0027-8424). [PMC](/wiki/PubMed_Central "PubMed Central") [34224](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC34224). [PMID](/wiki/PubMed_Identifier "PubMed Identifier") [10500106](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10500106).
  29. **^** Cicerone, R.J.; Oremland, R.S. (1988). ["Biogeochemical aspects of atmospheric methane"](//webfiles.uci.edu/setrumbo/public/Methane_papers/Cicerone_Global%20Biogeochem%20Cy_1988.pdf) (PDF). _Global Biogeochemical Cycles_. **2** (4): 299–327. [Bibcode](/wiki/Bibcode "Bibcode"):[1988GBioC...2..299C](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1988GBioC...2..299C). [doi](/wiki/Digital_object_identifier "Digital object identifier"):[10.1029/GB002i004p00299](//doi.org/10.1029%2FGB002i004p00299).
  30. **^** Karhu, J.A.; Holland, H.D. (1 October 1996). ["Carbon isotopes and the rise of atmospheric oxygen"](http://geology.geoscienceworld.org/cgi/content/abstract/24/10/867). _[Geology](/wiki/Geology_\(journal\) "Geology \(journal\)")_. **24** (10): 867–870. [Bibcode](/wiki/Bibcode "Bibcode"):[1996Geo....24..867K](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1996Geo....24..867K). [doi](/wiki/Digital_object_identifier "Digital object identifier"):[10.1130/0091-7613(1996)024<0867:CIATRO>2.3.CO;2](//doi.org/10.1130%2F0091-7613%281996%29024%3C0867%3ACIATRO%3E2.3.CO%3B2).
  31. **^** Harding, Stephan (2006). _Animate Earth_. Chelsea Green Publishing. p. 65. [ISBN](/wiki/International_Standard_Book_Number "International Standard Book Number") [ 978-1-933392-29-5](/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-1-933392-29-5 "Special:BookSources/978-1-933392-29-5").
  32. **^** ["Interagency Report Says Harmful Algal Blooms Increasing"](https://web.archive.org/web/20080209234239/http://www.publicaffairs.noaa.gov/releases2007/sep07/noaa07-r435.html). 12 September 2007. Archived from [the original](http://www.publicaffairs.noaa.gov/releases2007/sep07/noaa07-r435.html) on 9 February 2008.
  33. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Lovelock, James. _The Vanishing Face of Gaia_. Basic Books, 2009, pp. 195-197. [ISBN](/wiki/International_Standard_Book_Number "International Standard Book Number") [978-0-465-01549-8](/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-0-465-01549-8 "Special:BookSources/978-0-465-01549-8")
  34. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Capra, Fritjof (1996). _The web of life: a new scientific understanding of living systems_. Garden City, N.Y: Anchor Books. p. 23. [ISBN](/wiki/International_Standard_Book_Number "International Standard Book Number") [ 978-0-385-47675-1](/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-0-385-47675-1 "Special:BookSources/978-0-385-47675-1").
  35. **^** S.R. Weart, 2003, _The Discovery of Global Warming_ , Cambridge, Harvard Press
  36. **^** Harding, Stephan. _Animate Earth Science, Intuition and Gaia_. Chelsea Green Publishing, 2006, p. 44. [ISBN](/wiki/International_Standard_Book_Number "International Standard Book Number") [1-933392-29-0](/wiki/Special:BookSources/1-933392-29-0 "Special:BookSources/1-933392-29-0")
  37. **^** [100 Photographs that Changed the World by Life - The Digital Journalist](http://digitaljournalist.org/issue0309/lm11.html)
  38. **^** Lovelock, J.E. (1965). "A physical basis for life detection experiments". _[Nature](/wiki/Nature_\(journal\) "Nature \(journal\)")_. **207** (7): 568–570. [Bibcode](/wiki/Bibcode "Bibcode"):[1965Natur.207..568L](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1965Natur.207..568L). [doi](/wiki/Digital_object_identifier "Digital object identifier"):[10.1038/207568a0](//doi.org/10.1038%2F207568a0). [PMID](/wiki/PubMed_Identifier "PubMed Identifier") [5883628](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/5883628).
  39. **^** [Geophysiology](http://www.jameslovelock.org/page4.html)
  40. **^** Lovelock, J.E.; Giffin, C.E. (1969). "Planetary Atmospheres: Compositional and other changes associated with the presence of Life". _Advances in the Astronautical Sciences_. **25** : 179–193. [ISBN](/wiki/International_Standard_Book_Number "International Standard Book Number") [978-0-87703-028-7](/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-0-87703-028-7 "Special:BookSources/978-0-87703-028-7").
  41. **^** Lovelock, John and Sidney Epton, (February 8, 1975). "The quest for Gaia". [New Scientist](https://books.google.com/books?id=pnV6UYEkU4YC&printsec=frontcover&source=gbs_ge_summary_r&cad=0#v=onepage&q&f=false), p. 304.
  42. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Lovelock, James 2001
  43. **^** Hamilton, W.D.; Lenton, T.M. (1998). ["Spora and Gaia: how microbes fly with their clouds"](https://web.archive.org/web/20110723055017/http://ejour-fup.unifi.it/index.php/eee/article/viewFile/787/733). _Ethology Ecology & Evolution_. **10** (1): 1–16. [doi](/wiki/Digital_object_identifier "Digital object identifier"):[10.1080/08927014.1998.9522867](//doi.org/10.1080%2F08927014.1998.9522867). Archived from [the original](http://ejour-fup.unifi.it/index.php/eee/article/viewFile/787/733) (PDF) on 2011-07-23.
  44. **^** J. E. Lovelock (1990). "Hands up for the Gaia hypothesis". _[Nature](/wiki/Nature_\(journal\) "Nature \(journal\)")_. **344** (6262): 100–2. [Bibcode](/wiki/Bibcode "Bibcode"):[1990Natur.344..100L](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1990Natur.344..100L). [doi](/wiki/Digital_object_identifier "Digital object identifier"):[10.1038/344100a0](//doi.org/10.1038%2F344100a0).
  45. **^** Volk, Tyler (2003). _Gaia's Body: Toward a Physiology of Earth_. Cambridge, Massachusetts: [MIT Press](/wiki/MIT_Press "MIT Press"). [ISBN](/wiki/International_Standard_Book_Number "International Standard Book Number") [ 978-0-262-72042-7](/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-0-262-72042-7 "Special:BookSources/978-0-262-72042-7").
  46. **^** Joseph, Lawrence E. (November 23, 1986). ["Britain's Whole Earth Guru"](https://www.nytimes.com/1986/11/23/magazine/britain-s-whole-earth-guru.html). _The New York Times Magazine_. Retrieved  1 December 2013.
  47. **^** Bunyard, Peter (1996), "Gaia in Action: Science of the Living Earth" (Floris Books)
  48. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Turney, Jon. "Lovelock and Gaia: Signs of Life" (Revolutions in Science)
  49. **^** Kirchner, James W. (1989). "The Gaia hypothesis: Can it be tested?". _Reviews of Geophysics_. **27** (2): 223. [Bibcode](/wiki/Bibcode "Bibcode"):[1989RvGeo..27..223K](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1989RvGeo..27..223K). [doi](/wiki/Digital_object_identifier "Digital object identifier"):[10.1029/RG027i002p00223](//doi.org/10.1029%2FRG027i002p00223).
  50. **^** Lenton, TM; Lovelock, JE (2000). "Daisyworld is Darwinian: Constraints on adaptation are important for planetary self-regulation". _Journal of Theoretical Biology_. **206** (1): 109–14. [doi](/wiki/Digital_object_identifier "Digital object identifier"):[10.1006/jtbi.2000.2105](//doi.org/10.1006%2Fjtbi.2000.2105). [PMID](/wiki/PubMed_Identifier "PubMed Identifier") [10968941](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10968941).
  51. **^** Simón, Federico (21 June 2000). ["GEOLOGÍA Enfoque multidisciplinar La hipótesis Gaia madura en Valencia con los últimos avances científicos"](http://elpais.com/diario/2000/06/21/futuro/961538404_850215.html). _El País_ (in Spanish). Retrieved  1 December 2013.
  52. **^** American Geophysical Union. ["General Information Chapman Conference on the Gaia Hypothesis University of Valencia Valencia, Spain June 19-23, 2000 (Monday through Friday)"](http://www.agu.org/meetings/chapman/chapman_archive/cc00bcall.html). _AGU Meetings_. Retrieved  7 January 2017.
  53. **^** Official Site of Arlington County Virginia. ["Gaia Theory Conference at George Mason University Law School"](https://web.archive.org/web/20131203043657/http://www.arlingtonva.us/departments/Communications/PressReleases/page7530.aspx). Archived from [the original](http://www.arlingtonva.us/departments/Communications/PressReleases/page7530.aspx) on 2013-12-03. Retrieved 1 December 2013.
  54. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Doolittle, W. F. (1981). "Is Nature Really Motherly". _The Coevolution Quarterly_. Spring: 58–63.
  55. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Dawkins, Richard (1982). _The Extended Phenotype: the Long Reach of the Gene_. Oxford University Press. [ISBN](/wiki/International_Standard_Book_Number "International Standard Book Number") [ 978-0-19-286088-0](/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-0-19-286088-0 "Special:BookSources/978-0-19-286088-0").
  56. **^** Gould S.J. (June 1997). ["Kropotkin was no crackpot"](http://libcom.org/library/kropotkin-was-no-crackpot). _Natural History_. **106** : 12–21.
  57. **^** Abram, D. (1988) "The Mechanical and the Organic: On the Impact of Metaphor in Science" in Scientists on Gaia, edited by Stephen Schneider and Penelope Boston, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1991
  58. **^** ["The Mechanical and the Organic"](https://web.archive.org/web/20120223165936/http://www.wildethics.org/essays/the_mechanical_and_the_organic.html). Archived from [the original](http://www.wildethics.org/essays/the_mechanical_and_the_organic.html) on February 23, 2012. Retrieved  August 27, 2012.
  59. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Lovelock, James (2001), _Homage to Gaia: The Life of an Independent Scientist_ (Oxford University Press)
  60. **^** Margulis, Lynn. Symbiotic Planet: A New Look At Evolution. Houston: Basic Book 1999
  61. **^** [Waltham, David](/w/index.php?title=David_Waltham&action=edit&redlink=1 "David Waltham \(page does not exist\)") (2014). [_Lucky Planet: Why Earth is Exceptional – and What that Means for Life in the Universe_](http://www.iconbooks.com/blog/title/lucky-planet/). Icon Books. [ISBN](/wiki/International_Standard_Book_Number "International Standard Book Number") [ 9781848316560](/wiki/Special:BookSources/9781848316560 "Special:BookSources/9781848316560").
  62. **^** [Cockell, Charles](/wiki/Charles_Cockell "Charles Cockell"); Corfield, Richard; Dise, Nancy; Edwards, Neil; Harris, Nigel (2008). [_An Introduction to the Earth-Life System_](http://www.cambridge.org/us/academic/subjects/earth-and-environmental-science/palaeontology-and-life-history/introduction-earth-life-system). Cambridge (UK): Cambridge University Press. [ISBN](/wiki/International_Standard_Book_Number "International Standard Book Number") [ 9780521729536](/wiki/Special:BookSources/9780521729536 "Special:BookSources/9780521729536").
  63. **^** Quinn, P.K.; Bates, T.S. (2011), "The case against climate regulation via oceanic phytoplankton sulphur emissions", _Nature_ , **480** (7375): 51–56, [Bibcode](/wiki/Bibcode "Bibcode"):[2011Natur.480...51Q](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2011Natur.480...51Q), [doi](/wiki/Digital_object_identifier "Digital object identifier"):[10.1038/nature10580](//doi.org/10.1038%2Fnature10580), [PMID](/wiki/PubMed_Identifier "PubMed Identifier") [22129724](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22129724)
  64. **^** Peter Ward (2009), _The Medea Hypothesis: Is Life on Earth Ultimately Self-Destructive?_ , [ISBN](/wiki/International_Standard_Book_Number "International Standard Book Number") [0-691-13075-2](/wiki/Special:BookSources/0-691-13075-2 "Special:BookSources/0-691-13075-2")
  65. **^** Tyrrell, Toby (2013), [_On Gaia: A Critical Investigation of the Relationship between Life and Earth_](http://press.princeton.edu/titles/9959.html), Princeton: Princeton University Press, p. 209, [ISBN](/wiki/International_Standard_Book_Number "International Standard Book Number") [ 9780691121581](/wiki/Special:BookSources/9780691121581 "Special:BookSources/9780691121581")
  66. **^** Tyrrell, Toby (26 October 2013), "Gaia: the verdict is…", _New Scientist_ , **220** (2940): 30–31, [doi](/wiki/Digital_object_identifier "Digital object identifier"):[10.1016/s0262-4079(13)62532-4](//doi.org/10.1016%2Fs0262-4079%2813%2962532-4)
  67. **^** Tyrrell, Toby (2013), [_On Gaia: A Critical Investigation of the Relationship between Life and Earth_](http://press.princeton.edu/titles/9959.html), Princeton: Princeton University Press, p. 208, [ISBN](/wiki/International_Standard_Book_Number "International Standard Book Number") [ 9780691121581](/wiki/Special:BookSources/9780691121581 "Special:BookSources/9780691121581")

## Sources[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Gaia_hypothesis&action=edit&section=20
"Edit section: Sources")]

  * Bondì, Roberto (2006). _Blu come un'arancia. Gaia tra mito e scienza_. Torino, Utet: Prefazione di Enrico Bellone. [ISBN](/wiki/International_Standard_Book_Number "International Standard Book Number") [ 978-88-02-07259-3](/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-88-02-07259-3 "Special:BookSources/978-88-02-07259-3").
  * Bondì, Roberto (2007). _Solo l'atomo ci può salvare. L'ambientalismo nuclearista di James Lovelock_. Torino, Utet: Prefazione di Enrico Bellone. [ISBN](/wiki/International_Standard_Book_Number "International Standard Book Number") [ 978-88-02-07704-8](/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-88-02-07704-8 "Special:BookSources/978-88-02-07704-8").
  * Jaworski, Helan (1928). _Le Géon ou la Terre vivante_. Paris: Librairie Gallimard.
  * Lovelock, James. _The Independent_. [The Earth is about to catch a morbid fever](https://web.archive.org/web/20060408121826/http://comment.independent.co.uk/commentators/article338830.ece), 16 January 2006.
  * Kleidon, Axel (2004). "Beyond Gaia: Thermodynamics of Life and Earth system functioning". _Climatic Change_. **66** (3): 271–319. [doi](/wiki/Digital_object_identifier "Digital object identifier"):[10.1023/B:CLIM.0000044616.34867.ec](//doi.org/10.1023%2FB%3ACLIM.0000044616.34867.ec).
  * Lovelock, James (1995). _The Ages of Gaia: A Biography of Our Living Earth_. New York: Norton. [ISBN](/wiki/International_Standard_Book_Number "International Standard Book Number") [ 978-0-393-31239-3](/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-0-393-31239-3 "Special:BookSources/978-0-393-31239-3").
  * Lovelock, James (2000). _Gaia: A New Look at Life on Earth_. Oxford: Oxford University Press. [ISBN](/wiki/International_Standard_Book_Number "International Standard Book Number") [ 978-0-19-286218-1](/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-0-19-286218-1 "Special:BookSources/978-0-19-286218-1").
  * Lovelock, James (2001). _Homage to Gaia: The Life of an Independent Scientist_. Oxford: Oxford University Press. [ISBN](/wiki/International_Standard_Book_Number "International Standard Book Number") [ 978-0-19-860429-7](/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-0-19-860429-7 "Special:BookSources/978-0-19-860429-7").
  * Lovelock, James (2006), interviewed in _How to think about science_ , CBC Ideas (radio program), broadcast January 3, 2008. [Link](http://www.cbc.ca/ideas/episodes/2009/01/02/how-to-think-about-science-part-1---24-listen/)
  * Lovelock, James (2007). [_The Revenge of Gaia: Why the Earth Is Fighting Back — and How We Can Still Save Humanity_](/wiki/The_Revenge_of_Gaia "The Revenge of Gaia"). Santa Barbara CA: Allen Lane. [ISBN](/wiki/International_Standard_Book_Number "International Standard Book Number") [ 978-0-7139-9914-3](/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-0-7139-9914-3 "Special:BookSources/978-0-7139-9914-3").
  * Lovelock, James (2009). _The Vanishing Face of Gaia: A Final Warning_. New York, NY: Basic Books. [ISBN](/wiki/International_Standard_Book_Number "International Standard Book Number") [ 978-0-465-01549-8](/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-0-465-01549-8 "Special:BookSources/978-0-465-01549-8").
  * Margulis, Lynn (1998). _Symbiotic Planet: A New Look at Evolution_. London: Weidenfeld  & Nicolson. [ISBN](/wiki/International_Standard_Book_Number "International Standard Book Number") [978-0-297-81740-6](/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-0-297-81740-6 "Special:BookSources/978-0-297-81740-6").
  * Marshall, Alan (2002). _The Unity of Nature: Wholeness and Disintegration in Ecology and Science_. River Edge, N.J: Imperial College Press. [ISBN](/wiki/International_Standard_Book_Number "International Standard Book Number") [ 978-1-86094-330-0](/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-1-86094-330-0 "Special:BookSources/978-1-86094-330-0").
  * Staley M (September 2002). ["Darwinian selection leads to Gaia"](http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0022519302930596). _J. Theor. Biol_. **218** (1): 35–46. [doi](/wiki/Digital_object_identifier "Digital object identifier"):[10.1006/jtbi.2002.3059](//doi.org/10.1006%2Fjtbi.2002.3059). [PMID](/wiki/PubMed_Identifier "PubMed Identifier") [12297068](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12297068).
  * Schneider, Stephen Henry (2004). _Scientists debate Gaia: the next century_. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press. [ISBN](/wiki/International_Standard_Book_Number "International Standard Book Number") [ 978-0-262-19498-3](/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-0-262-19498-3 "Special:BookSources/978-0-262-19498-3").
  * Thomas, Lewis G. (1974). _The Lives of a Cell; Notes of a Biology Watcher_. New York: [Viking Press](/wiki/Viking_Press "Viking Press"). [ISBN](/wiki/International_Standard_Book_Number "International Standard Book Number") [ 978-0-670-43442-8](/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-0-670-43442-8 "Special:BookSources/978-0-670-43442-8").

## Further
reading[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Gaia_hypothesis&action=edit&section=21 "Edit
section: Further reading")]

## External
links[[edit](/w/index.php?title=Gaia_hypothesis&action=edit&section=22 "Edit
section: External links")]

