---
title: "In the digital age, cognitive biases are running wild" 
date: 2019-05-23 
draft: false 
---

Story source:

https://hackernoon.com/in-the-digital-age-cognitive-biases-are-running-wild-420b8f4f7cb5


# How the Internet Amplifies Our Cognitive Biases

Photo by [jesse
orrico](https://unsplash.com/@jessedo81?utm_source=medium&utm_medium=referral)
on [Unsplash](https://unsplash.com?utm_source=medium&utm_medium=referral)

#### Here are three strange ways the human mind works:

  * If a person with a certain strong belief is presented with clear evidence of the belief being false, this may lead to a reinforcement of the belief.
  * A person might draw different conclusions from the same type of information depending on in what way the information is being presented.
  * A person who has just been told about a phenomenon which he/she never noticed before, starts paying attention to it and now sees it/hears about it everywhere.

These examples of cognitive biases show how easily our perception and thinking
is being tricked and led astray. More than a 100 cognitive biases have been
identified so far. The Wikipedia [list collecting them
all](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_cognitive_biases) is both a
fascinating and sobering read.

Considering how flawed our thinking and perception tends to be, it’s hard not
to be amazed by humanity’s achievements and how far civilization has come. As
cognitive biases affect every single individual no matter their standing,
academic credentials, authority or projected confidence, and produces the
constant risk of wrong decision-making and subsequent conflicts, the advances
and fairly peaceful state in not all, but a large number of societies is
against all odds.

This remarkable outcome became possible because over millennia, humanity
discovered strategies and systems to reduce the impact of individual cognitive
biases on the collective reasoning — often through painful and bloody trial-
and-error.

On an individual biological level, eliminating cognitive biases before they
happen is impossible. For now, these biases are our evolutionary legacy and
we’re stuck with them. The best one can do is to be aware of one’s failures in
reasoning and make a deliberate effort to act against an initial thinking
error.

###  **How modern societies reduced the harm of cognitive biases**

On a society level, it is possible to reduce the negative consequences of
people’s cognitive biases and to correct for them. The successful recipe that
emerged over time (and sadly, only after endless suffering of tens of millions
of people throughout history) is built around a few core ideas such as:

  * Distributing power on many shoulders, so that the harm one person’s flawed thinking can cause is being limited.
  * Delaying decision making to allow for thorough investigations instead of empowering impulsive moves, for example in the legal system, which proved to be way better at generating justice and figuring out if someone is guilty than if the verdict and punishment is left to an emotional crowd on the street.
  * Creating systems that control each other’s outputs or perspectives on mistakes and flawed thinking (for example the pluralist model of government or the editorial approval processes in publishing).

For all their shortcomings and inequalities, the most advanced civilizations
of the pre-internet age had been comparatively successful in containing the
negative influence of people’s individual cognitive biases, by making use of
the learned lessons of the past, and also simply due to limitations in
available technology.

Then came the internet.

###  **Internet-enabled amplification of cognitive biases**

For all the greatness and freedom it brought to billions of people, by now
it’s evident that ubiquitous connectivity has come with a set of major
challenges. Aside from surveillance and information security issues, what I am
personally mostly concerned about is how the internet reverses some of the
previous achievements of reducing the aggregate harm of people’s cognitive
biases on a society level.

The internet, the tools it spawned and the dynamics they’ve led to, enable
what the previous most advanced societies to some extend prevented, and what
might increase the surface and consequences of individual cognitive biases:

  * Power is being concentrated in the hands of a few global tech companies, their CEOs and their algorithms, as well as among a small number of individuals who become “influencers” and sometimes boast tens of millions of loyal followers. It’s hard to prove, but one cannot rule out that someone like PewDiePie, with close to 100 million YouTube followers, does hold the ability to change more minds than any reputable media organization ever has been able to. If a beloved influencer pundit makes an uneducated critical comment about vaccines, for example, the societal consequences can be wide-reaching.
  * Built-in delays and friction are being removed. An angry tweet or blog post is published in a few seconds and a person might be deemed guilty by the public court of [social media](https://hackernoon.com/tagged/social-media) in an instant, with sometimes existential consequences.
  * Some of the mechanisms that ought to help to check others’ decisions and ideas for cognitive biases are failing, due to the technical, social and psychological dynamics of online-fueled discourse, which lead to [group polarization](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Group_polarization) and dogmas instead of open and critical exchanges with contrary viewpoints. In other words: Persuasion becomes much harder, while the willingness to listen and to emphasize is decreasing. Once someone is a firm part of an ideological group, contrary viewpoints become a threat to his/her identity, and thus are being considered hostile per definition. Noteworthy, many journalists [are obsessed with Twitter](https://blog.ayjay.org/a-plea-to-journalists/), and thereby heavily influenced by these mechanisms. That is deeply regrettable, because they are — consciously or unconsciously — carrying the skewed “conclusions” of the malfunctioning Twitter discourse into the rest of society.

My current operating theory is that the internet-enabled amplification of the
harmful consequences of individuals’ cognitive biases is not the only, but a
major contributor to the slow but steady erosion of best practices, systems
and institutions that acted as essential foundation of the most advanced, most
peaceful and most democratic societies.

This erosion leads to a host of dysfunctions on the individual, societal and
political level. Phenomena such as systematic disinformation, polarization,
radicalization in various flavors, the spread of conspiracy theories, mistrust
in science, us-vs-them-thinking and outrage/anger as a default mode with
obvious negative effects on mental health, are — while not new in themselves —
all connected to this amplification trend and the product of a variety of
underlying cognitive biases; that is, by flawed thinking or the absence of
thinking in favor of behavior caused by primal impulses and emotional
reflexes.

It’s hard to predict where this will lead to in detail, as there are numerous
systems involved, creating a complex interdependence and multi-layered
feedback loops that — as I would argue — no single human can fully grasp. But
what’s clear is that taken together, the trend doesn’t look good. If the
results of cognitive biases are allowed to run wild on a society-wide scale
for too long, this easily might lead to devastating outcomes, as it always
has.

Therefore, it would be better to not reach that point.  
Assuming that this is indeed as much of a problem as I claim it to be, what
could be done?

Well, simple: People just have to get more aware of when they are affected by
cognitive biases, and actively work against their damaging effects…

Ok, it’s not really simple at all. But that’s still likely the only viable
solution, since the digital era, the empowerment it brought to the individual
and the attention- and engagement-related incentive structures it created, is
the reality.

### There are a few obvious challenges in tackling cognitive biases:

1\. The knowledge about and awareness of cognitive biases isn’t very
widespread. Even though some of the most “famous” cognitive biases such as
confirmation bias, group think or loss aversion are nowadays mentioned
frequently in the media and possibly even in school (not when I went to school
but maybe this changed) as general phenomena clouding people’s reasoning, it’s
still rare that they are being noticed or much thought about by those who are
subject to it at any given moment or those affiliated with them while it is
happening.

2\. Learning about the occurrence of a cognitive bias does make most people
feel pretty bad. We don’t like to be faced with the harsh reality of how easy
our mind’s are being fooled. We prefer to see ourselves as fairly intelligent
and reasonable.

3\. Not actively working against one’s cognitive biases can provide desirable
short-term benefits for the individual, while challenging one’s cognitive
biases can do the opposite. An example: For someone closely aligned with an
highly ideological group whose perspective is fueled by cognitive biases such
as confirmation bias (favoring information that confirms a prior belief or
bias) and selective perspective (not noticing or more quickly forgetting
stimuli that cause emotional discomfort and contradict prior beliefs),
questioning these beliefs will likely lead to ostracism from the group, while
buying the whole package of beliefs and dogmas provides a sense of unity,
belonging and a purpose.

Tackling the systemic issues caused by cognitive biases in the digital age
means taking into account all three of these challenges. What’s needed is an
approach which increases an individual’s knowledge about cognitive biases,
helps to identify flawed thinking when it happens, uses psychological tactics
to reduce discomfort felt by an individual when being confronted with an
instance of cognitive bias in him-/herself, and offers incentives perceived as
attractive enough by the individual to accepting the “costs” of this type self
improvement work.

###  **An AI-powered personal coach to help reduce cognitive biases**

Possibly, all this could be achieved with an AI-powered personal coach, which
keeps an eye on an individual’s online activity and chimes in whenever
necessary with helpful advice, such as “Don’t you want to do this 1-minute
breathing exercise before you send that emotional tweet?” or “Have you
considered that this person who you are attacking is also a human being with
feelings like yours?” or “Here is an interesting fact about that topic which
you might not be aware of…”. A solution like that would have to be based on
insights from [psychology](https://hackernoon.com/tagged/psychology) and
behavioral sciences and could make use of instruments such as nudging,
gamification and tangible rewards (e.g. crypto currency, gift cards,
discounts, cash…. ) to attract and retain users. Ironically, it would have to
exploit and leverage our cognitive biases in order to get us hooked, engaged
and willing to work on ourselves.

Maybe such a tool is wishful thinking. It could suffer from all kinds of
flaws. Impossible technical requirements (it’s easy to ask from the comfort of
one’s armchair for an “AI” solution that spots cognitive biases but hard to
built a sufficiently smart one in reality), usability challenges (how to
integrate this with people’s “online life”?), lack of interest or even
hostility among potential users, suspicions of hidden agendas (the conspiracy
peddlers will come up with something) or surveillance, and so on.

There might be other, simpler, better ways. Hopefully there are. I also should
hope to be simply wrong. That the problem I am describing is not bigger than
before, and that the increased tension, growing disregard for the learnings of
the past, and unwillingness to engage with other viewpoints are only a fashion
which people will get tired of eventually, before it causing dangerous second-
order effects.

However, if one considers how much suffering and bloodshed the aggregate
consequences of individual flawed thinking have brought humanity throughout
history, from religious wars and witch burning to genocide and violent
extremism, raising awareness and finding ways to reduce their impact can never
be a wrong thing.

=======  
[ _Sign up for my weekly email_](http://weekly.meshedsociety.com/) _, loaded
with great things to read about the digital world._

