---
title: "ZoomInfo surges 100% on its first day of trading" 
date: 2020-06-04 
draft: false 
---

Story source:

https://markets.businessinsider.com/news/stocks/zoominfo-stock-price-first-day-trading-nasdaq-ipo-tech-market-2020-6-1029282428


![Nasdaq Stock
Exchange](https://images.markets.businessinsider.com/image/5ed7ae0d3ad86177a5227ea3-2400/gettyimages-1216067098.jpg)Noam
Galai/Getty Images

  * **ZoomInfo Technologies priced its initial public offering at $21 Thursday, above its expected range.Â**
  * **Shares of ZoomInfo popped when it started trading Thursday, and surged as much as 100% at intraday highs.Â**
  * **It's the latest big-tech IPO of the year, showing signs of recovery in the market.Â**
  * **[Read more on Business Insider](https://www.businessinsider.com/?utm_source=markets&utm_medium=ingest).**

* * *

Shares of ZoomInfo Technologies, ticker ZI, surged as much as 100% at intraday
highs in their first-ever day of trading Thursday.Â

Earlier in the day, the business-intelligence company priced its initial
public offering at $21 per share, already higher than its expected range of
$19 to $20 per share.

The stock popped even more when it started trading Thursday, opening at $40
per share and surging to a high of $42 per share - more than double its IPO
price - before paring some gains later in the day.Â

ZoomInfo expected to raise as much as $890 million in the IPO on 44.5 million
shares, [according to a regulatory
filing](https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1794515/000162828020008791/zoominfos-1a4.htm).
It's the latest big-tech listing of 2020, showing signs of recovery in the IPO
market slammed by the coronavirus pandemic. On Wednesday, Warner Music Group,
[so far the largest US IPO of the
year](https://markets.businessinsider.com/news/stocks/warner-music-stock-
price-first-day-trading-largest-ipo-
group-2020-6-1029278221?utm_source=markets&utm_medium=ingest), gained as much
as 20% in its first day of trading.Â

_**Read more:** ['I'm buying the property with 100% of other people's money':
Here's the creative real-estate-investing strategy Josiah Smelser used to
complete almost $4 million in deals over the last 12
months](https://www.businessinsider.com/real-estate-investing-strategy-
creative-funding-approach-josiah-
smelser-2020-6?utm_source=markets&utm_medium=ingest)_

The company joins [two others with similar - and potentially confusing -
names](https://markets.businessinsider.com/news/stocks/zoominfo-stock-
exchange-nasdaq-debut-risks-new-confusion-zoom-
video-2020-6-1029277574?utm_source=markets&utm_medium=ingest)Â listed on the
public market. [Zoom Video,](https://markets.businessinsider.com/stocks/zm-
stock?utm_source=markets&utm_medium=ingest?utm_source=markets&utm_medium=ingest)
ticker ZM, has surged during the coronavirus pandemic as it became a top mode
of communication amid sweeping lockdowns and people working from home.

[Zoom Technologies](https://markets.businessinsider.com/stocks/zoom-
stock?utm_source=markets&utm_medium=ingest?utm_source=markets&utm_medium=ingest),
ticker ZOOM, had trading temporarily suspended in March after posting outsized
gains likely due to a name mix-up.Â

