---
title: "The VR Winter" 
date: 2020-05-10 
draft: false 
---

Story source:

https://www.ben-evans.com/benedictevans/2020/5/8/the-vr-winter


Does that tell us anything? Surely if a raw experience is amazing, the
applications will come with a bit more time? Well, perhaps. If you try the
Oculus Quest, the experience is indeed amazing and it’s easy to think that
this is part of the future. However, if you’d tried one of today’s games
consoles in 1980 you’d have had the same reaction - clearly amazing and
clearly part of the future. But it turned out that games consoles were a
150-200m unit installed base, not the 1.5bn of PCs, let alone the 4bn of
smartphones. That’s a big business, but it’s a branch off the side of the tech
industry, not its central, driving ecosystem. Most people’s experience of
console games is the demo in the window of a Microsoft store in the mall -
they say ‘that’s pretty’ and walk past. A long time ago a school teacher named
Hammy Sparks (yes, really) blew my mind by suggesting that there can be
different sized infinities - in tech, there can be different sized amazings.

Smartphones are broad and universal, whereas consoles are deep and narrow, and
deep and narrow is a smaller market. VR is even deeper and even narrower, and
so if we can’t work out a form of content that isn’t also deep and narrow, I
think we have to assume that VR will be a subset of the games console. That
would be a decent business, but it’s not why Mark Zuckerberg bought Oculus.
It’s another branch off the side of tech, not the next platform after
smartphones.

There’s a bunch of ideas that float around here. One is that you can’t really
do apps and productivity yet because the screens aren’t high enough resolution
to read text, so we can’t yet work in a 360 degree virtual sphere, and that
will come. Another is that the headsets need to be even smaller and even
lighter, and do pass-through so you can see the room around you. Yet another
is that we just have to keep waiting, and in particular wait for a larger
installed base (presumably driven by those deep-and-narrow games sales), and
the innovation will somehow kick in.

There’s nothing fundamentally illogical about any of these ideas, but they do
remind me a little of Karl Popper’s criticism of Marxists - that when asked
why their supposedly scientific prediction hadn’t happened yet they would
always say ‘ah, the historical circumstances aren’t right - you just have to
wait a few more years’. There is also, of course, the tendency of Marxists to
respond to being asked why communist states seem always to turn out badly by
saying ‘ah, but that isn’t proper communism’. I seem to hear ‘ah, but that
isn’t proper VR’ an awful lot these days.

To put this another way, it’s quite common to say that the iPhone, or PCs, or
aircraft also looked primitive and useless once, but they got better, and the
same will happen here. The problem with this is that the iPhone or the Wright
Flier were indeed primitive and impractical, but they were breakthroughs of
concept with clear paths for radical improvement. The iPhone had a bad camera,
no apps and no 3G, but there was no reason why those couldn’t quickly be
added. Blériot flew across the Channel just six years after the Wrights’ first
powered flight. What’s the equivalent forward path here? There was an obvious
roadmap for getting from a duct-taped mock-up to the Oculus Quest, and today
for making the Quest even smaller and lighter, but what is the roadmap for
breaking into a completely different model of consumer behaviour or consumer
application? What specifically do you have to believe will change to take VR
beyond games?

Poking away at this a bit further, I think there are maybe four propositions
to think about.

  * Is it true that we are essentially almost there, and a bit more iteration of the hardware and the developer ecosystem will get us to a tipping point, and the S Curve will turn upwards? How would we know?

  * Are we where smartphones were before the iPhone? All of the core technology was there - we had apps and touch screens and fast data networks and so on - but we needed a change in the paradigm to package them all up in a much more accessible form. Is Oculus the new Symbian? It’s worth noting that no-one was really saying this about mobile _before_ the iPhone - [as I wrote here](https://www.ben-evans.com/benedictevans/2016/2/19/mobile-smartphones-and-hindsight), the need for a new approach was only obvious in hindsight.

  * Is there a fundamental contradiction between a universally accessible experience and a device that you put on your head that shuts out the world around you and places you into an alternative reality? Is ‘VR that isn’t deep and narrow’ an oxymoron? That, after all, was the answer for games consoles. I suspect a lot of people in tech would reject this out of hand - the _right_ VR, when we have it, _must_ be the future, but one can’t actually take it as a given. 

  * Or, by extension, is this the point - that ‘real’ VR needs some completely different device and that’s what would take it to universality? VR as HMD is narrow but VR as, say, neural lace is not?

Reading Mark’s quote above, as he talks about the merging of AR and VR, it
strikes me that this and many visions for VR (cf ‘Ready Player One’) are
really describing not ‘an HMD but a bit better’ but glasses, or perhaps
contact lenses, or maybe even something even further into the future like
neural implants. On that basis I think you could argue that even the Oculus
Quest is not 3/4 of the way ‘there’ but actually still just at the beginning
of the VR S Curve. The successor to the smartphone will be something that
doesn’t just merge AR and VR but make the distinction irrelevant - something
that you can wear all day every day, and that can seamlessly both occlude and
supplement the real world and generate indistinguishable volumetric space. On
that view the Oculus isn’t the iPhone - it’s the Newton, or the Apple 2, which
were also far from universal, and the platonic ideal universal device is a
decade or two into the future.

In turn, the trouble with this argument is that when tech people take about
‘ten years’ or ‘twenty years’, they are effectively right on the edge of
science fiction - my grandfather wrote a lot of science fiction, but I try to
think about the stuff we have now, and the roadmaps we have now that might
tell us what we can build next. But if ‘real VR’ needs something that’s ten or
twenty years away, we’re in for another VR winter.

Pulling all of these threads together, the issue I circle around is not just
that we don’t have a ‘killer app’ for VR beyond games, but that we don’t know
what the path to getting one might be. We can make assertions of belief from
first principles - there was no killer app for the first PCs either, but they
looked useful. When I started my career 3G was the hot topic, and every
investor kept asking ‘what’s the killer app for 3G?’ It turned out that the
killer app for having the internet in your pocket was, well, having the
internet in your pocket. But with each of those, we knew what to build next,
and with VR we don’t. That tells me that VR has a place in the future. It just
doesn’t tell me what kind of place.

