---
title: "DARPA Funds Earthworm-Inspired Soft Robot to Rapidly Dig Tunnels" 
date: 2020-06-05 
draft: false 
---

Story source:

https://www.nextgov.com/emerging-tech/2020/05/darpa-funds-earthworm-inspired-soft-robot-rapidly-dig-military-tunnels/165655/


General Electric Company’s technological development division GE Research is
creating and refining a soft and smart tunnel-digging robot—inspired by the
makeup and movements of earthworms—that could underpin critical underground
military operations of the future.

The research wing was recently tapped for a 15-month, $2.5 million project
through the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency’s Underminer program to
perfect and prove the capabilities of its already-designed robotic prototype,
which insiders believe will also have applications beyond the battlefield.

“The key objectives of the DARPA program are to demonstrate a robot that can
move at a speed of 10 cm/sec and dig a tunnel that is 500 meters in length and
at least 10 cm in diameter,” GE Research’s project leader Deepak Trivedi
recently told _Nextgov_. “We have made great progress in the project thus far
and are on track to meeting these objectives.”

Through [Underminer](https://www.darpa.mil/program/underminer), DARPA aims to
explore and demonstrate the rapid construction and uses of tactical
underground tunnel networks to support the U.S. military’s efforts amid harsh
environments. The ideal end result would be new solutions incorporating
advanced robotics and sensing technologies that can outperform present
commercial drilling capabilities. Aside from GE, the agency also
[selected](https://www.darpa.mil/news-events/2020-04-01) teams from Colorado
School of Mines and Sandia National Laboratories to demonstrate their own tech
solutions and integrations.

“The ability to quickly bore tactical tunnels could benefit contingency
operations such as rapid ammunition resupply, rescue missions, or other
immediate needs,” DARPA’s program manager Andrew Nuss told _Nextgov_ Tuesday.
“As a research and development agency, DARPA's role is to advance technologies
to address national security challenges.”

He added that the agency’s transition partners in the military services would
ultimately determine the timelines for precisely when these new in-the-works
solutions might be deployed to support operations on—or under—the frontlines.

The inspiration for GE Research’s earthworm-mimicking soft robot and overall
approach to the ongoing project stems from Trivedi’s graduate and doctoral
research during his time in Penn State University’s mechanical engineering
program. Embarking on his doctoral work—which GE’s
[release](https://www.ge.com/research/newsroom/ge-research-demonstrate-giant-
earthworm-robot-superfast-ultra-efficient-tunnel-digging) notes was “one of
the earliest in soft robotics”—Trivedi sought to build and demonstrate a
biologically-inspired robot based off of naturally occurring soft structures,
such as the arms of octopi or the trunks of elephants.

The earthworm-like robot now being produced for DARPA incorporates some of his
previously developed characteristics like squeezing through tight spaces,
while also being equipped to dig deep and rapidly move around. So far, GE’s
team designed a [prototype](https://youtu.be/WlcQij-SsXg) that is multiple
feet in length, with artificial muscles that deliberately imitate earthworms’
agile movements through soil and, according to GE’s release, it traverses
“with the force of tree roots penetrating through soft rock.”

Though the team didn’t work with live earthworms in the effort, Trivedi said
much of their understanding and insights were formed reviewing scientific
literature, “which provided rich detail on how earthworms are able to move so
efficiently through soil and can carve out nearly perfect tunnels.”

“It’s how they move that intrigued us most,” he said.

Earthworms rely on a flexible-but-powerful muscular structure filled with
fluid, called the “hydrostatic skeleton,” the mechanical engineer
explained—and that structure poses a stark contrast to conventional robots,
which have rigid structures and discrete joints, limiting their ability to
operate in unstructured and congested settings. Trivedi and team’s robot is
made up of powerful, yet soft, earthworm-imitating “muscles” that he said
enable it to “function in a similar fashion to a real earthworm in nature.”
This system will adapt and autonomously change its gait in response to
shifting soil conditions and eventually have a range of more degrees of
freedom in movement that traditional bots with joints.

“The robot can apply large forces for making the tunnel, yet easily steer
through obstacles due to its flexible structure,” Trivedi said.

In their effort, the research team is taking a “very agile and iterative
approach,” quickly fabricating new designs of robot-related prototypes as they
uncover new insights from their tests and experiments. And one of the shifts
they’re set on making early on is a move from a pneumatic to hydraulic muscle
system for powering the movements of the robot. Initial prototypes for the
project use a pneumatic system, which Trivedi explained relies on compressed
or pressured air.

“Hydraulic systems rely on liquids, which is more consistent with the makeup
of earthworms,” he noted. “Earthworms use a combination of liquid and muscles
to move efficiently through the soil.”

The work is cutting-edge and soft robots are not yet the mainstream, so what
Trivedi called the “building blocks” behind them—components like soft sensors
and actuators—usually do not exist commercially. This means “a lot of
ingenuity and effort goes into designing and fabricating reliable and capable
soft active components for these robots,” he said, noting that while this
might be a challenge, it is “also an opportunity for advancing the state of
the art.”

The team already performed some initial lab scale demonstrations of the robot
tunneling through dirt, as well as some outdoor testing of the prototype. On
top of perfecting the emerging robot’s structure, another top priority going
forward is to “build more autonomy” into how the smart structure moves and
operates.

“In the future, we’d like the robot to be given a destination from point A to
point B that it can seek and find on its own,” Trivedi said. “This will
require the integration of artificial intelligence, sensing controls and
automation technology.”

To that end, the team plans to tap into AI and sensing expertise from insiders
across GE’s Research Lab. And though DARPA’s end use for the to-be-completed
solutions are being created with the intent to support U.S. military
personnel, Trivedi said the use of the tool is not solely limited to
underground tunneling. The company already previously produced and field-
tested snake-like robots that could be used for jet engine inspection and
repair.

“The work DARPA is funding also could lead to other significant advances in
soft robotics that open up a whole new set of applications in new areas like
industrial inspection and infrastructure such as optical fiber for high speed
internet in remote places,” Trivedi said. “So much of what DARPA funds has a
positive multiplier effect when it comes to technology advancements and paving
the way to new applications, and this program could have similar positive
impacts down the line.”

