---
title: Front End Developer Handbook 2019 
date: 2019-05-22 
draft: false 
---

Story source:

https://frontendmasters.com/books/front-end-handbook/2019/


This is a guide that everyone can use to learn about the practice of front-end
development. It broadly outlines and discusses the practice of front-end
engineering: how to learn it and what tools are used when practicing it in
2019.

It is specifically written with the intention of being a professional resource
for potential and currently practicing front-end developers to equip
themselves with learning materials and development tools. Secondarily, it can
be used by managers, CTOs, instructors, and head hunters to gain insights into
the practice of front-end development.

The content of the handbook favors web technologies (HTML, CSS, DOM, and
JavaScript) and those solutions that are directly built on top of these open
technologies. The materials referenced and discussed in the book are either
best in class or the current offering to a problem.

The book should not be considered a comprehensive outline of all resources
available to a front-end developer. The value of the book is tied up in a
terse, focused, and timely curation of just enough categorical information so
as not to overwhelm anyone on any one particular subject matter.

The intention is to release an update to the content yearly. This is currently
the fourth year an edition has been released.

## Chapter 1. What Is a Front-end Developer?

This chapter provides a baseline explanation for front-end development and the
front-end developer discipline.

> Front-end web development, also known as client-side development is the
practice of producing HTML, CSS and JavaScript for a website or Web
Application so that a user can see and interact with them directly. The
challenge associated with front end development is that the tools and
techniques used to create the front end of a website change constantly and so
the developer needs to constantly be aware of how the field is developing.

>

> The objective of designing a site is to ensure that when the users open up
the site they see the information in a format that is easy to read and
relevant. This is further complicated by the fact that users now use a large
variety of devices with varying screen sizes and resolutions thus forcing the
designer to take into consideration these aspects when designing the site.
They need to ensure that their site comes up correctly in different browsers
(cross-browser), different operating systems (cross-platform) and different
devices (cross-device), which requires careful planning on the side of the
developer.

>

> <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Front-end_web_development>

![](./assets/images/what-is-front-end-dev.png) Image source:
<https://www.upwork.com/hiring/development/front-end-developer/>

#### A Front-end Developer...

A front-end developer architects and develops websites and web applications
using web technologies (i.e., [HTML](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-
US/docs/Web/HTML), [CSS](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS),
and [JavaScript](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript)),
which typically runs on the [Open Web
Platform](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_Web_Platform) or acts as
compilation input for non-web platform environments (i.e., [React
Native](https://facebook.github.io/react-native/)).

A person enters into the field of front-end development by learning to build a
website or web application which relies on HTML, CSS, and JavaScript and
commonly runs in a [web browser](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_browser)
but can also run in a [headless
browser](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Headless_browser),
[WebView](http://developer.telerik.com/featured/what-is-a-webview/), or as
compilation input for a native runtime environment. These four run times
scenarios are explained below.

**Web Browsers (most common)**

A web browser is software used to retrieve, present, and traverse information
on the [WWW](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_Wide_Web). Typically,
browsers run on a desktop or laptop computer, tablet, or phone, but as of late
a browser can be found on just about anything (i.e, on a fridge, in cars,
etc.).

The most common web browsers are (shown in order of [most used
first](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Usage_share_of_web_browsers#Summary_tables)):

**Headless Browsers**

Headless browsers are a web browser **without** a graphical user interface
that can be controlled from a command line interface programmatically for the
purpose of web page automation (e.g., functional testing, scraping, unit
testing, etc.). Think of headless browsers as a browser that you can run
programmatically from the command line that can retrieve and traverse web page
code.

The most common headless browsers are:

**Webviews**

[Webviews](http://developer.telerik.com/featured/what-is-a-webview/) are used
by a native OS, in a native application, to run web pages. Think of a
[webview](http://developer.telerik.com/featured/what-is-a-webview/) like an
iframe or a single tab from a web browser that is embedded in a native
application running on a device (e.g.,
[iOS](https://developer.apple.com/library/ios/documentation/UIKit/Reference/UIWebView_Class/),
[android](http://developer.android.com/reference/android/webkit/WebView.html),
[windows](https://msdn.microsoft.com/library/windows/apps/windows.ui.xaml.controls.webview.aspx)).

The most common solutions for
[webview](http://developer.telerik.com/featured/what-is-a-webview/)
development are:

  * [Cordova](https://cordova.apache.org/) (typically for native phone/tablet apps) 
  * [NW.js](https://github.com/nwjs/nw.js) (typically used for desktop apps) 
  * [Electron](http://electron.atom.io/) (typically used for desktop apps) 

**Native from Web Tech**

Eventually, what is learned from web browser development can be used by front-
end developers to craft code for environments that are not fueled by a browser
engine (i.e. web platform). As of late, development environments are being
dreamed up that use web technologies (e.g., CSS and JavaScript), without web
engines, to create native applications.

Some examples of these environments are:

## Chapter 2. The Practice of Front-end Development: Overview

This chapter will break down and broadly describes the practice of front-end
engineering starting with, "How Front-End Developers Are Made".

### 2.1 - How Front-End Developers Are Made

How exactly does one become a front-end developer? Well, it's complicated.
Just consider this road map:

![](assets/images/frontend.png)

Image source: <https://github.com/kamranahmedse/developer-roadmap>

Today, in general, one can't go to college and expect to graduate with a
degree in front-end engineering. And, I rarely hear of or meet front-end
developers who suffered through what is likely a deprecated computer science
degree or graphic design degree to end up writing HTML, CSS, and JavaScript
professionally. From my perspective, most of the people working on the front-
end today generally seem to be self-taught from the ground up or cross over
into the front-end space from design or computer science fields.

If you were to set out today to become a front-end developer I would loosely
strive to follow the process outlined below (Chapter 3 and Chapter 4 will dive
into more details on learning resources).

  1. Learn, roughly, how the [web](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/Getting_started_with_the_web/How_the_Web_works) [platform](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/Common_questions/How_does_the_Internet_work) works. Make sure you know the "what" and "where" of [HTML, CSS, DOM, JavaScript, Domains, DNS, URLs, HTTP, browsers, and servers/hosting](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/Getting_started_with_the_web). Don't dive deep on anything just yet, just aim to understand the parts at play and how they loosely fit together. Start by building simple web pages. 
  2. [Learn HTML](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/HTML)
  3. [Learn CSS](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/CSS)
  4. [Learn JavaScript](https://youtu.be/QjKH1J77gjI?list=PL055Epbe6d5bQubu5EWf_kUNA3ef_qbmL)
  5. Learn DOM
  6. Learn the fundamentals of user interface design (i.e. UI patterns, interaction design, user experience design, and usability).
  7. Learn CLI/command line
  8. Learn the practice of software engineering (i.e., Application design/architecture, templates, Git, testing, monitoring, automating, code quality, development methodologies).
  9. Get opinionated and customize your tool box with whatever makes sense to your brain (e.g. Webpack, React, and Mobx).
  10. Learn Node.js

A short word of advice on learning. [Learn the actual underlying technologies,
before learning
abstractions.](https://youtu.be/QjKH1J77gjI?list=PL055Epbe6d5bQubu5EWf_kUNA3ef_qbmL)
Don't learn jQuery, learn the DOM. Don't learn SASS, learn CSS. Don't learn
JSX, learn HTML. Don't learn TypeScript, learn JavaScript. Don't learn
Handlebars, learn JavaScript ES6 templates. Don't just use Bootstrap, learn UI
patterns.

Lately a lot of non-accredited, expensive, front-end code schools/bootcamps
have emerged. These avenues of becoming a front-end developer are typically
teacher directed courses, that follow a more traditional style of learning,
from an official instructor (i.e., syllabus, test, quizzes, projects, team
projects, grades, etc.).

Keep in mind, if you are considering an expensive training program, this is
the web! Everything you need to learn is on the web for the taking, costing
little to nothing. However, if you need someone to tell you how to take and
learn what is low cost to free, and hold you accountable for learning it, you
should consider a traditional instructor lead class room setting. Otherwise, I
am not aware of any other profession that is practically free for the taking
with an internet connection, a [couple of dollars a month for screencasting
memberships](https://frontendmasters.com/join/), and a burning desire for
knowledge.

For example, if you want to get going today, consuming one or more of the
following self-directed resources below can work:

When getting your start, you should fear most things that conceal complexity.
Abstractions (e.g. jQuery) in the wrong hands can give the appearance of
advanced skills, while all the time hiding the fact that a developer has an
inferior understanding of the basics or underlying concepts.

It is assumed that on this journey you are not only learning, but also doing
as you learn and investigate tools. Some suggest only doing to learn. While
others suggest only learning about doing. I suggest you find a mix of both
that matches how your brain works and do that. But, for sure, it is a mix! So,
don't just read about it, do it. Learn, do. Learn, do. Repeat indefinitely
because things change fast. This is why learning the fundamentals, and not
abstractions, are so important.

### 2.2 - Front-End Job Titles

[A great divide has been brewing in the front-end developer space for several
years between two very different types of so-called front-end
developers](https://css-tricks.com/the-great-divide/). On the one side, you
have JavaScript-focused programmers who write JavaScript for front-end
runtimes that likely have computer science skills with a software development
history. They more than likely view HTML and CSS as an abstraction (i.e.
[JSX](https://reactjs.org/docs/introducing-jsx.html) and [CSS in
JS](https://hackernoon.com/all-you-need-to-know-about-css-in-
js-984a72d48ebc)). On the other side, you have, most likely, non-computer
science educated developers who focus on HTML, CSS, and JavaScript as it
specifically pertains to the UI. In 2019, when entering or trying to
understand the front-end developer space you will absolutely feel this divide.
The term front-end developer is on the verge of meaninglessness without
clarifying words to address what type of front-end developer is being
discussed.

Below is a list and description of various front-end job titles (Keep in mind
titles are [hard](https://blog.prototypr.io/dissecting-front-end-job-
titles-7f72a0ef0bc5)). The common, or most used (i.e., generic), title for a
front-end developer is, "front-end developer" or "front-end engineer". Note
that any job that contains the word "front-end", "client-side", "web UI",
"HTML", "CSS", or "JavaScript" typically infers that a person has some degree
of HTML, CSS, DOM, and JavaScript professional know how.

**Front-End Developer** : The generic job title that describes a developer who
is skilled to some degree at HTML, CSS, DOM, and JavaScript and implementing
these technologies on the web platform.

**Front-End Engineer (aka JavaScript Developer or Full-stack JavaScript
Developer)** : The job title given to a developer who comes from a computer
science, engineering, background and is using these skills to work with front-
end technologies. This role typically requires computer science knowledge and
years of software development experience. When the word "JavaScript
Application" is included in the job title, this will denote that the developer
should be an advanced JavaScript developer possessing advanced programming,
software development, and application development skills (i.e has years of
experience building front-end software applications).

**CSS/HTML Developer** : The front-end job title that describes a developer
who is skilled at HTML and CSS, excluding JavaScript and application, know
how.

**Front-End Web Designer** : When the word "Designer" is included in the job
title, this will denote that the designer will possess front-end skills (i.e.,
HTML & CSS) but also professional design (Visual Design and Interaction
Design) skills.

**UI (User Interface) Developer/Engineer** : When the word "Interface" or "UI"
is included in the job title, this will denote that the developer should
posses interaction design skills in addition to front-end developer skills or
front-end engineering skills.

**Mobile/Tablet Front-End Developer** : When the word "Mobile" or "Tablet" is
included in the job title, this will denote that the developer has experience
developing front-ends that run on mobile or tablet devices (either natively or
on the web platform, i.e., in a browser).

**Front-End SEO Expert** : When the word "SEO" is included in the job title,
this will denote that the developer has extensive experience crafting front-
end technologies towards an SEO strategy.

**Front-End Accessibility Expert** : When the word "Accessibility" is included
in the job title, this will denote that the developer has extensive experience
crafting front-end technologies that support accessibility requirements and
standards.

**Front-End Dev. Ops** : When the word "DevOps" is included in the job title,
this will denote that the developer has extensive experience with software
development practices pertaining to collaboration, integration, deployment,
automation, and quality.

**Front-End Testing/QA** : When the word "Testing" or "QA" is included in the
job title, this will denote that the developer has extensive experience
testing and managing software that involves unit testing, functional testing,
user testing, and A/B testing.

**Notes:**

  1. If you come across the "Full Stack" or the generic "Web Developer" terms in job titles these words may be used by an employer to describe a role that is responsible for all aspects of web/app development, i.e., both front-end (potentially including design) and back-end.

### 2.3 - Baseline Web Technologies Employed by Front-End Developers

![](assets/images/web-tech-employed.jpg)

The following core web technologies are employed by front-end developers
(consider learning them in this order):

  1. Hyper Text Markup Language (aka HTML)
  2. Cascading Style Sheets (aka CSS)
  3. Uniform Resource Locators (aka URLs)
  4. Hypertext Transfer Protocol (aka HTTP)
  5. JavaScript Programming Language (aka ECMAScript 262)
  6. JavaScript Object Notation (aka JSON)
  7. Document Object Model (aka DOM)
  8. Web APIs (aka HTML5 and friends or Browser APIs)
  9. Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (aka WCAG) & Accessible Rich Internet Applications (aka ARIA)

For a comprehensive list of all web related specifications have a look at
[platform.html5.org](https://platform.html5.org/) or [MDN Web
APIs](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API).

The nine technologies just mentioned are defined below along with a link to
the relevant documentation and specification for each technology.

#### Hyper Text Markup Language (aka HTML)

> HyperText Markup Language, commonly referred to as HTML, is the standard
markup language used to create web pages. Web browsers can read HTML files and
render them into visible or audible web pages. HTML describes the structure of
a website semantically along with cues for presentation, making it a markup
language, rather than a programming language.

>

> — [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HTML)

Most relevant specifications / documentation:

#### Cascading Style Sheets (aka CSS)

> Cascading Style Sheets (CSS) is a style sheet language used for describing
the look and formatting of a document written in a markup language. Although
most often used to change the style of web pages and user interfaces written
in HTML and XHTML, the language can be applied to any kind of XML document,
including plain XML, SVG and XUL. Along with HTML and JavaScript, CSS is a
cornerstone technology used by most websites to create visually engaging
webpages, user interfaces for web applications, and user interfaces for many
mobile applications.

>

> — [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cascading_Style_Sheets)

Most relevant specifications / documentation:

#### Hypertext Transfer Protocol (aka HTTP)

> The Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) is an application protocol for
distributed, collaborative, hypermedia information systems. HTTP is the
foundation of data communication for the World Wide Web.

>

> — [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hypertext_Transfer_Protocol)

Most relevant specifications:

#### Uniform Resource Locators (aka URL)

> A uniform resource locator (URL) (also called a web address) is a reference
to a resource that specifies the location of the resource on a computer
network and a mechanism for retrieving it. A URL is a specific type of uniform
resource identifier (URI), although many people use the two terms
interchangeably. A URL implies the means to access an indicated resource,
which is not true of every URI. URLs occur most commonly to reference web
pages (http), but are also used for file transfer (ftp), email (mailto),
database access (JDBC), and many other applications.

>

> — [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uniform_Resource_Locator)

Most relevant specifications:

#### Document Object Model (aka DOM)

> The Document Object Model (DOM) is a cross-platform and language-independent
convention for representing and interacting with objects in HTML, XHTML, and
XML documents. The nodes of every document are organized in a tree structure,
called the DOM tree. Objects in the DOM tree may be addressed and manipulated
by using methods on the objects. The public interface of a DOM is specified in
its application programming interface (API).

>

> — [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Document_Object_Model)

Most relevant specifications / documentation:

#### JavaScript Programming Language (aka ECMAScript 262)

> JavaScript is a high level, dynamic, untyped, and interpreted programming
language. It has been standardized in the ECMAScript language specification.
Alongside HTML and CSS, it is one of the three essential technologies of World
Wide Web content production; the majority of websites employ it and it is
supported by all modern web browsers without plug-ins. JavaScript is
prototype-based with first-class functions, making it a multi-paradigm
language, supporting object-oriented, imperative, and functional programming
styles. It has an API for working with text, arrays, dates and regular
expressions, but does not include any I/O, such as networking, storage or
graphics facilities, relying for these upon the host environment in which it
is embedded.

>

> — [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JavaScript)

Most relevant specifications / documentation:

#### Web APIs (aka HTML5 and friends)

> When writing code for the Web using JavaScript, there are a great many APIs
available. Below is a list of all the interfaces (that is, types of objects)
that you may be able to use while developing your Web app or site.

>

> — [Mozilla](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API)

Most relevant documentation:

#### JavaScript Object Notation (aka JSON)

> It is the primary data format used for asynchronous browser/server
communication (AJAJ), largely replacing XML (used by AJAX). Although
originally derived from the JavaScript scripting language, JSON is a language-
independent data format. Code for parsing and generating JSON data is readily
available in many programming languages. The JSON format was originally
specified by Douglas Crockford. It is currently described by two competing
standards, RFC 7159 and ECMA-404. The ECMA standard is minimal, describing
only the allowed grammar syntax, whereas the RFC also provides some semantic
and security considerations. The official Internet media type for JSON is
application/json. The JSON filename extension is .json.

>

> — [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSON)

Most relevant specifications:

#### Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (aka WCAG) & Accessible Rich
Internet Applications (aka ARIA)

> Accessibility refers to the design of products, devices, services, or
environments for people with disabilities. The concept of accessible design
ensures both “direct access” (i.e., unassisted) and "indirect access" meaning
compatibility with a person's assistive technology (for example, computer
screen readers).

>

> — [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Accessibility)

### 2.4 - Potential Front-end Developer Skills

![](assets/images/front-end-skills.png)

Image source: <http://blog.naustud.io/2015/06/baseline-for-modern-front-end-
developers.html>

A basic to advanced understanding of HTML, CSS, DOM, JavaScript, HTTP/URL, and
web browsers is assumed for any type of professional front-end developer role.

Beyond the skills just mentioned, a front-end developer might also be
specifically skilled in one or more of the following:

  * Content Management Systems (aka CMS)
  * Node.js
  * Cross-Browser Testing
  * Cross-Platform Testing
  * Unit Testing
  * Cross-Device Testing
  * Accessibility / WAI-ARIA
  * Search Engine Optimization (aka SEO)
  * Interaction or User Interface Design
  * User Experience
  * Usability
  * E-commerce Systems
  * Portal Systems
  * Wireframing
  * CSS Layout / Grids
  * DOM Manipulation (e.g., jQuery)
  * Mobile Web Performance
  * Load Testing
  * Performance Testing
  * Progressive Enhancement / Graceful Degradation
  * Version Control (e.g., GIT)
  * MVC / MVVM / MV*
  * Functional Programming
  * Data Formats (e.g., JSON, XML)
  * Data APIs (e.g Restful API)
  * Web Font Embedding
  * Scalable Vector Graphics (aka SVG)
  * Regular Expressions
  * Microdata / Microformats
  * Task Runners, Build Tools, Process Automation Tools
  * Responsive Web Design
  * Object-Oriented Programming
  * Application Architecture
  * Modules
  * Dependency Managers
  * Package Managers
  * JavaScript Animation
  * CSS Animation
  * Charts / Graphs
  * UI Widgets
  * Code Quality Testing
  * Code Coverage Testing
  * Code Complexity Analysis
  * Integration Testing
  * Command Line / CLI
  * Templating Strategies
  * Templating Engines
  * Single Page Applications
  * Web/Browser Security
  * Browser Developer Tools

### 2.5 - Front-End Developers Develop For...

A front-end developer crafts HTML, CSS, and JS that typically runs on the [web
platform](http://tess.oconnor.cx/2009/05/what-the-web-platform-is) (e.g. a web
browser) delivered from one of the following operating systems (aka OSs):

These operating systems typically run on one or more of the following devices:

  * Desktop computer
  * Laptop / netbook computer
  * Mobile phone
  * Tablet
  * TV
  * Watch
  * [Things](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet_of_things) (i.e., anything you can imagine, car, refrigerator, lights, thermostat, etc.) 

![](assets/images/growth-iot.jpg)

Image source: <https://www.enterpriseirregulars.com/104084/roundup-internet-
things-forecasts-market-estimates-2015/>

Generally speaking, front-end technologies can run on the aforementioned
operating systems and devices using the following run time web platform
scenarios:

  * A web browser (examples: [Chrome, IE, Safari, Firefox](http://outdatedbrowser.com/en)). 
  * A [headless browser](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Headless_browser) (examples: [Headless Chromium](https://chromium.googlesource.com/chromium/src/+/lkgr/headless/README.md)). 
  * A [WebView](http://developer.telerik.com/featured/what-is-a-webview/)/browser tab (think [iframe](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/iframe)) embedded within a native application as a runtime with a bridge to native APIs. WebView applications typically contain a UI constructed from web technologies. (i.e., HTML, CSS, and JS). (examples: [Apache Cordova](https://cordova.apache.org/), [NW.js](http://nwjs.io/), [Electron](http://electron.atom.io/)) 
  * A native application built from web tech that is interpreted at runtime with a bridge to native APIs. The UI will make use of native UI parts (e.g., iOS native controls) not web technologies. (examples: [NativeScript](https://www.nativescript.org/), [React Native](https://facebook.github.io/react-native/)) 

### 2.6 - Front-End on a Team

A front-end developer is typically only one player on a team that designs and
develops web sites, web applications, or native applications running from web
technologies.

A bare-bones development team for building **professional** web sites or
software for the web platform will typically, minimally, contain the following
roles.

  * Visual Designer (i.e., fonts, colors, spacing, emotion, visuals concepts & themes)
  * UI/Interaction Designer/Information Architect (i.e., wireframes, specifying all user interactions and UI functionality, structuring information)
  * Front-End Developer (i.e., writes code that runs in client/on the device)
  * Back-End Developer (i.e., writes code that runs on the server)

The roles are ordered according to overlapping skills. A front-end developer
will typically have a good handle on UI/Interaction design as well as back-end
development. It is not uncommon for team members to fill more than one role by
taking on the responsibilities of an over-lapping role.

It is assumed that the team mentioned above is being directed by a project
lead or some kind of product owner (i.e., stakeholder, project manager,
project lead, etc.)

A larger web team might include the following roles not shown above:

  * SEO Strategists
  * DevOps Engineers
  * Performance Engineers
  * API Developers
  * Database Administrators
  * QA Engineers / Testers

### 2.7 - Generalist/Full-Stack Myth

![Full Stack Developer](assets/images/full-stack.jpg)

The term "Full-Stack" developer has come to take on several meanings. So many,
that not one meaning is clear when the term is used. Just consider the results
from the two surveys shown below. These results might lead one to believe that
being a full-stack developer is commonplace. But, in my almost 20 years of
experience, this is anything but the case in a professional context.

![](assets/images/fullstack1.png)

Image source: <https://medium.freecodecamp.com/we-asked-15-000-people-who-
they-are-and-how-theyre-learning-to-code-4104e29b2781#.ngcpn8nlz>

![](assets/images/fullstack2.png)

Image source: [https://insights.stackoverflow.com/survey/2017#developer-
profile-specific-developer-
types](https://insights.stackoverflow.com/survey/2018/#developer-profile)

The roles to design and develop a website or web application require a deep
set of skills and vast experience in the area of visual design, UI/interaction
design, [front-end development](https://github.com/kamranahmedse/developer-
roadmap#-front-end-roadmap), and [back-end
development](https://github.com/kamranahmedse/developer-roadmap#-back-end-
roadmap). Any person who can fill one or more of these 4 roles at a
professional level is an extremely rare commodity.

Pragmatically, you should seek to be, or seek to hire, an expert in one of
these roles (i.e. Visual Design, Interaction Design/IA, Front-end Dev, Back-
end Dev). Those who claim to operate at an expert level at one or more of
these roles are exceptionally rare.

However, given that JavaScript has infiltrated all layers of a technology
stack (i.e. Node.js) finding a full-stack JS developer who can code the front-
end and back-end is becoming less mythical. Typically, these full-stack
developers only deal with JavaScript. A developer who can code the front-end,
back-end, API, and database isn't as absurd as it once was (excluding visual
design, interaction design, and CSS). Still mythical in my opinion, but not as
uncommon as it once was. Thus, I wouldn't recommend a developer set out to
become a "full-stack" developer. In rare situations, it can work. But, as a
general concept for building a career as a front-end developer, I'd focus on
front-end technologies.

### 2.8 - Front-End Interviews

#### Preparing:

#### Quiz's:

#### Questions you may get asked:

#### Questions you ask:

### 2.9 - Front-End Job Boards

A plethora of technical job listing outlets exist. The narrowed list below are
currently the most relevant resources for finding a specific front-end
position/career.

### 2.10 - Front-End Salaries

The national average in the U.S for a mid-level front-end developer is
somewhere between
[$65k](https://www.payscale.com/research/US/Job=Front_End_Developer_%2f_Engineer/Salary)
and [100k](https://www.indeed.com/salaries/Front-End-Developer-Salaries).

Of course when you first start expect to enter the field at around 40k
depending upon location and experience.

**Notes:**

  1. A lead/senior front-end developer/engineer can potentially live wherever they want (i.e., work remotely) and make over $150k a year (visit [angel.co](https://angel.co/jobs), sign-up, review front-end jobs over $150k or examine the salary ranges on [Stack Overflow Jobs](https://stackoverflow.com/jobs?q=front-end&sort=y)). 

## Chapter 3. Learning Front-end Dev: Self Directed Resources/Recommendations

This chapter highlights the many resources (video training, books, etc.) that
an individual can use to direct their own learning process and career as a
front-end developer.

The learning resources identified (articles, books, videos, screencasts etc..)
will include both free and paid material. Paid material will be indicated with
[$].

### 3.1. - Learn Internet/Web

> The Internet is a global system of interconnected computer networks that use
the Internet protocol suite (TCP/IP) to link several billion devices
worldwide. It is a network of networks that consists of millions of private,
public, academic, business, and government networks of local to global scope,
linked by a broad array of electronic, wireless, and optical networking
technologies. The Internet carries an extensive range of information resources
and services, such as the inter-linked hypertext documents and applications of
the World Wide Web (WWW), electronic mail, telephony, and peer-to-peer
networks for file sharing.

>

> — [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet)

[ ![How the internet works](assets/images/how-the-internet-works.jpg)
](assets/images/how-the-internet-works.jpg)

Image source: <https://www.helloitsliam.com/2014/12/20/how-the-internet-works-
infographic/>

![](assets/images/who-runs-the-internet-infographic.jpg)

Image source: <http://www.bitrebels.com/technology/find-out-who-runs-the-
internet-chart/>

### 3.2. - Learn Web Browsers

> A web browser (commonly referred to as a browser) is a software application
for retrieving, presenting, and traversing information resources on the World
Wide Web. An information resource is identified by a Uniform Resource
Identifier (URI/URL) and may be a web page, image, video or other piece of
content. Hyperlinks present in resources enable users easily to navigate their
browsers to related resources. Although browsers are primarily intended to use
the World Wide Web, they can also be used to access information provided by
web servers in private networks or files in file systems.

>

> — [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_browser)

  1. [Chrome](http://www.google.com/chrome/) (engine: [Blink](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blink_%28layout_engine%29) \+ [V8](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/V8_%28JavaScript_engine%29)) 
  2. [Firefox](https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/new/) (engine: [Gecko](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gecko_%28software%29) \+ [SpiderMonkey](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SpiderMonkey_%28software%29)) 
  3. [Internet Explorer](http://windows.microsoft.com/en-us/internet-explorer/download-ie) (engine: [Trident](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trident_%28layout_engine%29) \+ [Chakra](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chakra_%28JScript_engine%29)) 
  4. [Safari](https://www.apple.com/safari/) (engine: [Webkit](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WebKit) \+ [SquirrelFish](https://trac.webkit.org/wiki/SquirrelFish)) 

![](assets/images/statcounter.png)

Image source: <http://gs.statcounter.com/browser-market-share>

#### Evolution of Browsers & Web Technologies (i.e., APIs)

#### How Browsers Work

#### Optimizing for Browsers:

#### Comparing Browsers

#### Browser Hacks

#### Developing for Browsers

In the past, front-end developers spent a lot of time making code work in
several different browsers. This was once a bigger issue than it is today.
Today, abstractions (e.g., React, Webpack, Post-CSS, Babel etc...) combined
with modern browsers make browser development fairly easy. The new challenge
is not which browser the user will use, but on which device they will run the
browser.

#### Evergreen Browsers

The latest versions of most modern browsers are considered evergreen browsers.
That is, in theory, they are supposed to automatically update themselves
silently without prompting the user. This move towards self-updating browsers
has been in reaction to the slow process of eliminating older browsers that do
not auto-update.

#### Picking a Browser

As of today, most front-end developers use Chrome and "Chrome Dev Tools" to
develop front-end code. However, the most used modern browsers all offer a
flavor of developer tools. Picking one to use for development is a subjective
choice. The more important issue is knowing which browsers, on which devices,
you have to support and then testing appropriately.

### 3.3 - Learn Domain Name System (aka DNS)

> The Domain Name System (DNS) is a hierarchical distributed naming system for
computers, services, or any resource connected to the Internet or a private
network. It associates various information with domain names assigned to each
of the participating entities. Most prominently, it translates domain names,
which can be easily memorized by humans, to the numerical IP addresses needed
for the purpose of computer services and devices worldwide. The Domain Name
System is an essential component of the functionality of most Internet
services because it is the Internet's primary directory service.

>

> — [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Domain_Name_System)

![](assets/images/how_dns_works.jpg)

Image source: <http://www.digital-digest.com/blog/DVDGuy/wp-
content/uploads/2011/11/how_dns_works.jpg>

### 3.4 - Learn HTTP/Networks (Including CORS & WebSockets)

> **HTTP** \- The Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) is an application
protocol for distributed, collaborative, hypermedia information systems. HTTP
is the foundation of data communication for the World Wide Web.

>

> — [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hypertext_Transfer_Protocol)

#### HTTP Specifications

#### HTTP Docs

#### HTTP Videos/Articles/Tutorials

#### HTTP Status Codes

> **CORS** \- Cross-origin resource sharing (CORS) is a mechanism that allows
restricted resources (e.g., fonts) on a web page to be requested from another
domain outside the domain from which the resource originated.

>

> — [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cross-origin_resource_sharing)

#### CORS Specifications

#### CORS

> **WebSockets** \- WebSocket is a protocol providing full-duplex
communication channels over a single TCP connection. The WebSocket protocol
was standardized by the IETF as RFC 6455 in 2011, and the WebSocket API in Web
IDL is being standardized by the W3C.

>

> — [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WebSocket)

#### WebSockets

### 3.5 - Learn Web Hosting

> A web hosting service is a type of Internet hosting service that allows
individuals and organizations to make their website accessible via the World
Wide Web. Web hosts are companies that provide space on a server owned or
leased for use by clients, as well as providing Internet connectivity,
typically in a data center.

>

> — [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_hosting_service)

#### General Learning:

![](assets/images/what-is-web-hosting-infographic.jpg)

Image source: <https://firstsiteguide.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/what-is-
web-hosting-infographic.jpg>

### 3.6 - Learn General Front-End Development

### 3.7 - Learn User Interface/Interaction Design

> **User Interface Design** \- User interface design (UI) or user interface
engineering is the design of user interfaces for machines and software, such
as computers, home appliances, mobile devices, and other electronic devices,
with the focus on maximizing the user experience. The goal of user interface
design is to make the user's interaction as simple and efficient as possible,
in terms of accomplishing user goals (user-centered design).

>

> — [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User_interface_design)

>

> **Interaction Design Pattern** \- A design pattern is a formal way of
documenting a solution to a common design problem. The idea was introduced by
the architect Christopher Alexander for use in urban planning and building
architecture, and has been adapted for various other disciplines, including
teaching and pedagogy, development organization and process, and software
architecture and design.

>

> — [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Design_pattern)

>

> **User Experience Design** \- User Experience Design (UXD or UED or XD) is
the process of enhancing user satisfaction by improving the usability,
accessibility, and pleasure provided in the interaction between the user and
the product. User experience design encompasses traditional human–computer
interaction (HCI) design, and extends it by addressing all aspects of a
product or service as perceived by users.

>

> — [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User_experience_design)

>

> **Human–Computer Interaction** \- Human–computer interaction (HCI)
researches the design and use of computer technology, focusing particularly on
the interfaces between people (users) and computers. Researchers in the field
of HCI both observe the ways in which humans interact with computers and
design technologies that lets humans interact with computers in novel ways.

>

> —
[Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Human%E2%80%93computer_interaction)

Minimally I'd suggest reading the following canonical texts on the matter so
one can support and potential build usable user interfaces.

### 3.8 - Learn HTML & CSS

> **HTML** \- HyperText Markup Language, commonly referred to as HTML, is the
standard markup language used to create web pages. Web browsers can read HTML
files and render them into visible or audible web pages. HTML describes the
structure of a website semantically along with cues for presentation, making
it a markup language, rather than a programming language.

>

> — [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HTML)

>

> **CSS** \- Cascading Style Sheets (CSS) is a style sheet language used for
describing the look and formatting of a document written in a markup language.
Although most often used to change the style of web pages and user interfaces
written in HTML and XHTML, the language can be applied to any kind of XML
document, including plain XML, SVG and XUL. Along with HTML and JavaScript,
CSS is a cornerstone technology used by most websites to create visually
engaging webpages, user interfaces for web applications, and user interfaces
for many mobile applications.

>

> — [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cascading_Style_Sheets)

Liken to constructing a house, one might consider HTML the framing and CSS to
be the painting & decorating.

#### General Learning:

#### Mastering CSS:

#### References/Docs:

#### Glossary/Vocabulary:

#### Standards/Specifications:

#### Architecting CSS:

#### Authoring/Architecting Conventions:

### 3.9 - Learn Search Engine Optimization

> Search engine optimization (SEO) is the process of affecting the visibility
of a website or a web page in a search engine's unpaid results — often
referred to as "natural," "organic," or "earned" results. In general, the
earlier (or higher ranked on the search results page), and more frequently a
site appears in the search results list, the more visitors it will receive
from the search engine's users. SEO may target different kinds of search,
including image search, local search, video search, academic search, news
search and industry-specific vertical search engines.

>

> — [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Search_engine_optimization)

![](assets/images/how-does-seo-work.jpg)

Image source: <https://visual.ly/community/infographic/computers/how-does-seo-
work>

#### General Learning:

### 3.10 - Learn JavaScript

> JavaScript is a high level, dynamic, untyped, and interpreted programming
language. It has been standardized in the ECMAScript language specification.
Alongside HTML and CSS, it is one of the three essential technologies of World
Wide Web content production; the majority of websites employ it and it is
supported by all modern web browsers without plug-ins. JavaScript is
prototype-based with first-class functions, making it a multi-paradigm
language, supporting object-oriented, imperative, and functional programming
styles. It has an API for working with text, arrays, dates and regular
expressions, but does not include any I/O, such as networking, storage or
graphics facilities, relying for these upon the host environment in which it
is embedded.

>

> — [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JavaScript)

#### Getting Started:

#### General Learning:

#### Mastering:

#### Functional JavaScript:

#### References/Docs:

#### Glossary/Encyclopedia/Jargon:

#### Standards/Specifications:

#### Style:

#### Deprecated JS Learning Resources:

#### JS Explorers/Visualizers:

### 3.11 - Learn DOM, BOM, CSSOM & jQuery

> **DOM** \- The Document Object Model (DOM) is a cross-platform and language-
independent convention for representing and interacting with objects in HTML,
XHTML, and XML documents. The nodes of every document are organized in a tree
structure, called the DOM tree. Objects in the DOM tree may be addressed and
manipulated by using methods on the objects. The public interface of a DOM is
specified in its application programming interface (API).

>

> — [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Document_Object_Model)

>

> **BOM** \- The Browser Object Model (BOM) is a browser-specific convention
referring to all the objects exposed by the web browser. Unlike the Document
Object Model, there is no standard for implementation and no strict
definition, so browser vendors are free to implement the BOM in any way they
wish.

>

> — [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Browser_Object_Model)

>

> **jQuery** \- jQuery is a cross-platform JavaScript library designed to
simplify the client-side scripting of HTML. jQuery is the most popular
JavaScript library in use today, with installation on 65% of the top 10
million highest-trafficked sites on the Web. jQuery is free, open-source
software licensed under the MIT License.

>

> — [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JQuery)

The ideal path, but certainly the most difficult, would be to first learn
JavaScript, then the DOM, then jQuery. However, do what makes sense to your
brain. Most front-end developers learn about JavaScript and then DOM by way of
first learning jQuery. Whatever path you take, just make sure JavaScript, the
DOM, and jQuery don't become a black box.

#### General Learning:

#### Mastering:

#### References/Docs:

#### Standards/Specifications:

### 3.12 - Learn Web Animation

#### General Learning:

#### Standards/Specifications:

### 3.13 - Learn Web Fonts, Icons, & Images

> Web typography refers to the use of fonts on the World Wide Web. When HTML
was first created, font faces and styles were controlled exclusively by the
settings of each Web browser. There was no mechanism for individual Web pages
to control font display until Netscape introduced the `<font>` tag in 1995,
which was then standardized in the HTML 3.2 specification. However, the font
specified by the tag had to be installed on the user's computer or a fallback
font, such as a browser's default sans-serif or monospace font, would be used.
The first Cascading Style Sheets specification was published in 1996 and
provided the same capabilities.

>

> The CSS2 specification was released in 1998 and attempted to improve the
font selection process by adding font matching, synthesis and download. These
techniques did not gain much use, and were removed in the CSS2.1
specification. However, Internet Explorer added support for the font
downloading feature in version 4.0, released in 1997. Font downloading was
later included in the CSS3 fonts module, and has since been implemented in
Safari 3.1, Opera 10 and Mozilla Firefox 3.5. This has subsequently increased
interest in Web typography, as well as the usage of font downloading.

>

> — [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_typography)

#### Fonts:

#### Icons:

#### Images:

### 3.14 - Learn Accessibility

> Accessibility refers to the design of products, devices, services, or
environments for people with disabilities. The concept of accessible design
ensures both “direct access” (i.e., unassisted) and "indirect access" meaning
compatibility with a person's assistive technology (for example, computer
screen readers).

>

> Accessibility can be viewed as the "ability to access" and benefit from some
system or entity. The concept focuses on enabling access for people with
disabilities, or special needs, or enabling access through the use of
assistive technology; however, research and development in accessibility
brings benefits to everyone.

>

> Accessibility is not to be confused with usability, which is the extent to
which a product (such as a device, service, or environment) can be used by
specified users to achieve specified goals with effectiveness, efficiency and
satisfaction in a specified context of use.

>

> Accessibility is strongly related to universal design which is the process
of creating products that are usable by people with the widest possible range
of abilities, operating within the widest possible range of situations. This
is about making things accessible to all people (whether they have a
disability or not).

>

> — [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Accessibility)

#### General Learning:

#### Standards/Specifications:

### 3.15 - Learn Web/Browser APIs

![](assets/images/web-api.png)

Image source: <http://www.evolutionoftheweb.com/>

The BOM (Browser Object Model) and the DOM (Document Object Model) are not the
only browser APIs that are made available on the web platform inside of
browsers. Everything that is not specifically the DOM or BOM, but an interface
for programming the browser could be considered a web or browser API
(tragically in the past some of these APIs have been called HTML5 APIs which
confuses their own specifics/standardize with the actual HTML5 specification
specifying the HTML5 markup language). Note that web or browser APIs do
include device APIs (e.g.,
[`Navigator.getBattery()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-
US/docs/Web/API/Navigator/getBattery)) that are available through the browser
on tablet and phones devices.

You should be aware of and learn, where appropriate, web/browser APIs. A good
tool to use to familiarize oneself with all of these APIs would be to
investigate the [HTML5test.com results for the 5 most current
browsers](https://html5test.com/compare/browser/index.html).

MDN has a great deal of information about web/browser APIs.

Keep in mind that not every API is specified by the W3C or WHATWG.

In addition to MDN, you might find the following resources helpful for
learning about all the web/browser API's:

### 3.16 - Learn JSON (JavaScript Object Notation)

> JSON, (canonically pronounced sometimes JavaScript Object Notation), is an
open standard format that uses human-readable text to transmit data objects
consisting of attribute–value pairs. It is the primary data format used for
asynchronous browser/server communication (AJAJ), largely replacing XML (used
by AJAX).

>

> Although originally derived from the JavaScript scripting language, JSON is
a language-independent data format. Code for parsing and generating JSON data
is readily available in many programming languages.

>

> The JSON format was originally specified by Douglas Crockford. It is
currently described by two competing standards, RFC 7159 and ECMA-404. The
ECMA standard is minimal, describing only the allowed grammar syntax, whereas
the RFC also provides some semantic and security considerations. The official
Internet media type for JSON is application/json. The JSON filename extension
is .json.

>

> — [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSON)

#### General Learning:

#### References/Docs:

#### Standards/Specifications:

#### Architecting:

### 3.17 - Learn JS Templates

A JavaScript template is typically used, but not always with a
[MV*](http://todomvc.com/) solution to separate parts of the view (i.e., the
UI) from the logic and model (i.e., the data or JSON).

Note that JavaScript 2015 (aka ES6) added a native templating mechanism called
["Templates strings"](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-
US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/template_strings). Additionally, templating
as of late has been replaced by things like
[JSX](https://facebook.github.io/jsx/), [a template
element](http://aurelia.io/docs/templating/basics), or [HTML
strings](https://angular.io/docs/ts/latest/guide/template-syntax.html#).

If I was not using React & JSX I'd first reach for JavaScript ["Templates
strings"](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-
US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/template_strings) and when that was lacking
move to [nunjucks](http://mozilla.github.io/nunjucks/getting-started.html).

### 3.18 - Learn Static Site Generators

Static site generators, typically written using server side code (i.e., ruby,
php, python, nodeJS, etc.), produce static HTML files from static text/data +
templates that are intended to be sent from a server to the client statically
without a dynamic nature.

#### General Learning:

### 3.19 - Learn Computer Science via JS

### 3.20 - Learn Front-End Application Architecture

#### General Learning:

#### Deprecated Learning Materials:

Not a lot of general content is being created on this topic as of late. Most
of the content offered for learning how to build front-end/SPA/JavaScript
applications presupposes you've decided up a tool like Angular, Ember, React,
or Aurelia.

My advice, in [2019](https://2018.stateofjs.com/front-end-
frameworks/overview/) learn [React](https://facebook.github.io/react/) and
[Mobx](https://github.com/mobxjs/mobx) and
[Apollo/graphql](https://www.apollographql.com/).

### 3.21 - Learn Data (i.e. JSON) API Design

### 3.22 - Learn React

#### Learning React:

#### Mastering React:

Once you have a good handle on React move on to learning a more robust state
management solution like [MobX](https://mobx.js.org/). If you are an
experienced developer with Functional Programming knowledge look at
[Redux](https://redux.js.org/). If you need help understanding the role of
state management beyond React's `setState` watch, "[Advanced State Management
in React (feat. Redux and MobX)](https://frontendmasters.com/courses/react-
state/)".

### 3.23 - Learn Application State Management

### 3.24 - Learn Progressive Web App

> Unlike traditional applications, progressive web apps are a hybrid of
regular web pages (or websites) and a mobile application. This new application
model attempts to combine features offered by most modern browsers with the
benefits of mobile experience.

>

> In 2015, designer Frances Berriman and Google Chrome engineer Alex Russell
coined the term "Progressive Web Apps" to describe apps taking advantage of
new features supported by modern browsers, including Service Workers and Web
App Manifests, that let users upgrade web apps to be first-class applications
in their native OS.

>

> According to Google Developers, these characteristics are:

>

>   * Progressive - Work for every user, regardless of browser choice because
they’re built with progressive enhancement as a core tenet.

>   * Responsive - Fit any form factor: desktop, mobile, tablet, or forms yet
to emerge.

>   * Connectivity independent - Service workers allow work offline, or on low
quality networks.

>   * App-like - Feel like an app to the user with app-style interactions and
navigation.

>   * Fresh - Always up-to-date thanks to the service worker update process.

>   * Safe - Served via HTTPS to prevent snooping and ensure content hasn’t
been tampered with.

>   * Discoverable - Are identifiable as “applications” thanks to W3C
manifests[6] and service worker registration scope allowing search engines to
find them.

>   * Re-engageable - Make re-engagement easy through features like push
notifications.

>   * Installable - Allow users to “keep” apps they find most useful on their
home screen without the hassle of an app store.

>   * Linkable - Easily shared via a URL and do not require complex
installation.

>

>

> — [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Progressive_web_app)

### 3.25 - Learn JS API Design

### 3.26 - Learn Browser Web Developer Tools

> Web development tools allow web developers to test and debug their code.
They are different from website builders and IDEs in that they do not assist
in the direct creation of a webpage, rather they are tools used for testing
the user facing interface of a website or web application.

>

> Web development tools come as browser add-ons or built in features in web
browsers. The most popular web browsers today like, Google Chrome, Firefox,
Opera, Internet Explorer, and Safari have built in tools to help web
developers, and many additional add-ons can be found in their respective
plugin download centers.

>

> Web development tools allow developers to work with a variety of web
technologies, including HTML, CSS, the DOM, JavaScript, and other components
that are handled by the web browser. Due to the increasing demand from web
browsers to do more popular web browsers have included more features geared
for developers.

>

> — [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_development_tools)

While most browsers come equipped with web developer tools, the [Chrome
developer tools](https://developers.google.com/web/tools/chrome-devtools/) are
currently the most talked about and widely used.

I'd suggest learning and using the [Chrome web developer
tools](https://developers.google.com/web/tools/chrome-devtools/), simply
because the best resources for learning web developer tools revolves around
Chrome DevTools.

### 3.27 - Learn the Command Line (aka CLI)

> A command-line interface or command language interpreter (CLI), also known
as command-line user interface, console user interface, and character user
interface (CUI), is a means of interacting with a computer program where the
user (or client) issues commands to the program in the form of successive
lines of text (command lines).

>

> — [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Command-line_interface)

#### General Learning:

#### Mastering:

### 3.28 - Learn Node.js

> Node.js is an open-source, cross-platform runtime environment for developing
server-side web applications. Node.js applications are written in JavaScript
and can be run within the Node.js runtime on OS X, Microsoft Windows, Linux,
FreeBSD, NonStop, IBM AIX, IBM System z and IBM i. Its work is hosted and
supported by the Node.js Foundation, a collaborative project at Linux
Foundation.

>

> Node.js provides an event-driven architecture and a non-blocking I/O API
designed to optimize an application's throughput and scalability for real-time
web applications. It uses Google V8 JavaScript engine to execute code, and a
large percentage of the basic modules are written in JavaScript. Node.js
contains a built-in library to allow applications to act as a web server
without software such as Apache HTTP Server, Nginx or IIS.

>

> — [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Node.js)

#### General Learning:

### 3.29 - Learn Modules

#### General Learning:

#### References/Docs:

### 3.30 - Learn Module loaders/bundlers

#### Webpack:

#### Rollup:

#### Parcel

### 3.31 - Learn Package Manager

> A package manager or package management system is a collection of software
tools that automates the process of installing, upgrading, configuring, and
removing software packages for a computer's operating system in a consistent
manner. It typically maintains a database of software dependencies and version
information to prevent software mismatches and missing prerequisites.

>

> — [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Package_manager)

#### General Learning:

### 3.32 - Learn Version Control

> A component of software configuration management, version control, also
known as revision control or source control, is the management of changes to
documents, computer programs, large web sites, and other collections of
information. Changes are usually identified by a number or letter code, termed
the "revision number," "revision level," or simply "revision." For example, an
initial set of files is "revision 1." When the first change is made, the
resulting set is "revision 2," and so on. Each revision is associated with a
timestamp and the person making the change. Revisions can be compared,
restored, and with some types of files, merged.

>

> — [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Version_control)

The most common solution used for [version
control](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Version_control) today is
[Git](https://git-scm.com/). Learn it!

#### General Learning:

#### Mastering:

#### References/Docs:

### 3.33 - Learn Build and Task Automation

> Build automation is the process of automating the creation of a software
build and the associated processes including: compiling computer source code
into binary code, packaging binary code, and running automated tests.

>

> — [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Build_automation)

#### General Learning:

#### References/Docs:

Gulp is great. However, you might only need `npm run`. Before turning to
additional complexity in your application stack ask yourself if `npm run` can
do the job. If you need more, use Gulp.

Read:

### 3.34 - Learn Site Performance Optimization

> Web performance optimization, WPO, or website optimization is the field of
knowledge about increasing the speed in which web pages are downloaded and
displayed on the user's web browser. With the average internet speed
increasing globally, it is fitting for website administrators and webmasters
to consider the time it takes for websites to render for the visitor.

>

> — [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_performance_optimization)

#### General Learning:

### 3.35 - Learn Testing

> **Unit Testing** \- In computer programming, unit testing is a software
testing method by which individual units of source code, sets of one or more
computer program modules together with associated control data, usage
procedures, and operating procedures, are tested to determine whether they are
fit for use. Intuitively, one can view a unit as the smallest testable part of
an application.

>

> — [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unit_testing)

>

> **Functional Testing** \- Functional testing is a quality assurance (QA)
process and a type of black box testing that bases its test cases on the
specifications of the software component under test. Functions are tested by
feeding them input and examining the output, and internal program structure is
rarely considered (not like in white-box testing). Functional testing usually
describes what the system does.

>

> — [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Functional_testing)

>

> **Integration Testing** \- Integration testing (sometimes called integration
and testing, abbreviated I &T) is the phase in software testing in which
individual software modules are combined and tested as a group. It occurs
after unit testing and before validation testing. Integration testing takes as
its input modules that have been unit tested, groups them in larger
aggregates, applies tests defined in an integration test plan to those
aggregates, and delivers as its output the integrated system ready for system
testing.

>

> — [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Integration_testing)

#### General Learning:

### 3.36 - Learn Headless Browsers

> A headless browser is a web browser without a graphical user interface.

>

> Headless browsers provide automated control of a web page in an environment
similar to popular web browsers, but are executed via a command line interface
or using network communication. They are particularly useful for testing web
pages as they are able to render and understand HTML the same way a browser
would, including styling elements such as page layout, color, font selection
and execution of JavaScript and AJAX which are usually not available when
using other testing methods. Google stated in 2009 that using a headless
browser could help their search engine index content from websites that use
AJAX.

>

> — [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Headless_browser)

[PhantomJS is no longer
maintained](https://www.infoq.com/news/2017/04/Phantomjs-future-uncertain),
[Headless
Chrome](https://chromium.googlesource.com/chromium/src/+/lkgr/headless/README.md)
steps in.

### 3.37 - Learn Offline Development

Offline development (aka offline first) is an area of knowledge and discussion
around development practices for devices that are not always connected to the
Internet or a power source.

#### General Learning:

### 3.38 - Learn Web/Browser/App Security

### 3.39 - Learn Multi-Device Development

![](assets/images/things.jpg)

Image source: <http://bradfrost.com/blog/post/this-is-the-web/>

A website or web application can run on a wide range of computers, laptops,
tablets and phones, as well as a handful of new devices (watches, thermostats,
fridges, etc.). How you determine what devices you'll support and how you will
develop to support those devices is called, "multi-device development
strategy". Below, I list the most common multi-device development strategies.

  * Build a [responsive (RWD)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Responsive_web_design) web site/app for all devices. 
  * Build an [adaptive/progressively](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adaptive_web_design) enhanced web site/app for all devices. 
  * Build a website, web app, native app, or hybrid-native app for each individual device or a grouping of devices.
  * Attempt to retrofit something you have already built using bits and parts from strategies 1, 2 or 3.

#### General Learning:

