---
title: "Geneticists use machine learning to solve medicine’s greatest mysteries" 
date: 2020-05-08 
draft: false 
---

Story source:

https://builtin.com/data-science/geneticists-machine-learning-medicine


These days, when we talk about data, we usually mean _a lot_ of data – not
just a few hundred entries in a spreadsheet, but rather hundreds of thousands
or more data points stored in massive databases. Netflix knows which of its
roughly 6,000 shows are watched by its 170 million subscribers. Amazon tracks
the more than 1 billion purchases made through its site each year. And
geneticists have collected DNA from millions of people to discover hundreds of
millions of genetic variants. Like Amazon and Netflix, geneticists are turning
to machine learning to find patterns in their data.

Machine learning, a class of self-teaching artificial intelligence techniques,
are increasingly popular because of their ability to tease out complex
patterns from data that are often nearly impossible to find with methods of
traditional statistics. One of the tasks at which machine learning excels is
to label things. Apple wants to [put names to the
faces](https://machinelearning.apple.com/2017/11/16/face-detection.html) in
your photo album. Netflix wants to know whether you’re likely to [give a show
a thumbs up or a thumbs down](https://www.wired.co.uk/article/how-do-netflixs-
algorithms-work-machine-learning-helps-to-predict-what-viewers-will-like). And
geneticists want to know whether a genetic variant in a patient’s gene is
causing disease.

This problem of labeling genetic variants is one of the big challenges of
medical genetics. It’s called the VUS problem – meaning “variants of uncertain
significance.” When a patient gets a genetic test as part of a diagnostic
workup — for cancer, a heart condition, or perhaps an unusual childhood
disease — doctors want to know whether that patient carries a disease-causing
genetic variant. Identifying pathogenic variants helps doctors make a
diagnosis and pick the right treatment. But the challenge is that every one of
us carries many genetic variants, most of them probably harmless. This means
that in many — if not most — cases, genetic test results come back with
mutations that are labeled VUS. Such results are essentially useless — a
cancer patient may have a mutation in a cancer-related gene, but if that
mutation is a VUS, the doctor has no idea whether or not it plays a role in
the patient’s disease.

To solve the VUS problem, geneticists and computational biologists are turning
to machine learning. Ultimately, researchers aim to label all of the hundreds
of millions of known (and many more as yet unknown) human genetic variants,
classifying them as either benign or potentially pathogenic. Tackling all
variants in one giant machine learning model isn’t realistic however, since
these variants can fall in any of tens of thousands of genes and hundreds of
thousands of regulatory sequences that control those genes, each of which
functions in its own specific way. A model like that would be like building a
program that not only helps Major League Baseball scouts [pick out promising
players](https://www.nbcnews.com/mach/science/how-ai-helping-sports-teams-
scout-star-players-ncna882516), but also predicts the performance of any
potential draft pick in any sport, from basketball to cricket.

To solve the VUS problem, geneticists and computational biologists break the
problem down into small tasks. Here are some of the most important strategies
they use.

##  **Machine learning should be deep learning**

Researchers who study genetic variants are putting much of their machine
learning efforts into a [set of
methods](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30478442) called “deep learning.”
These methods are called “deep” because they consist of [multiple layers of
computational units](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30971806/), called
neurons, that are connected together into so-called neural networks. Like
biological neurons, computational neurons work by receiving an input,
processing it, and then passing the output along to the next layer of neurons.

One big advantage of deep neural network models is that they automate the
process of picking out the features of the data that should go into the model,
something which not all machine learning algorithms do. For example, Netflix
[hires teams of so-called taggers](https://www.wired.co.uk/article/how-do-
netflixs-algorithms-work-machine-learning-helps-to-predict-what-viewers-will-
like) to watch movies and tag them with [descriptive
terms](https://www.huffpost.com/entry/netflix-secret-category-
codes_n_5bc61488e4b0a8f17ee685a6) like “visually striking,” “true bromance”,
and “cerebral TV drama.” Those descriptive terms are put into the models that
make personalized recommendations to subscribers. But tagging segments of DNA
is hard — what’s the genetic equivalent of “true bromance”?

This is where the power of deep learning comes in. Thanks to their layered
architecture, deep learning models mine the DNA sequence of A’s, T’s, C’s, and
G’s, and find the relevant features on their own. This is the equivalent of
having a computer watch a movie and come up with its own tags. That’s hard to
do with a movie, but much easier with the long lines of text that represent a
DNA sequence.

##  **Solve hard problems by learning easier tasks**

Determining whether a genetic variant drives a patient’s cancer is a hard
problem. There is a long chain of events between a cancer-causing mutation and
full-blown disease. An easier problem is predicting whether a genetic variant
has a more immediate impact on the molecular function of a segment of DNA. If
a variant has no impact on a molecular function, then that variant probably
isn’t causing disease.

Scientists have built several deep learning models that predict the whether a
variant affects the so-called epigenetic state of segments of DNA. The
epigenetic state of a segment of DNA indicates whether that segment is active
or inactive in a particular cell type. An epigenetic-state -altering mutation
might switch on a gene that is supposed to be off, which could, for example,
lead to the uncontrolled cell division of a growing tumor.

One of the models that make such predictions is called
[DeepSEA](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4768299/), developed by
Princeton scientists Jian Zhou and Olga Troyanskaya. DeepSEA was trained on
nearly 60,000 genetic variants, together with publicly available databases of
epigenetic data that were obtained from measurements made in cultured human
cells. Given a DNA sequence, the model predicts which variants alter
epigenetic states with fair accuracy. While these predictions don’t tell you
whether a variant causes disease, models like DeepSEA are a way for
geneticists to prioritize which variants to study in more depth.

##  **Make your own data**

One of the biggest challenges of the VUS problem is that all humans are
special – that is, each of us carries unique genetic variants that have never
been seen before. A [2016 study](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27535533)
looked for genetic variants in the genomes of over 60,000 people and found
that more than half of all variants are unique to the person who carries them.
This poses a huge problem for genetic testing – most patients will come in
with genetic variants about which we know nothing. A major task for machine
learning is to correctly classify these previously unseen variants.

One way that researchers are solving this problem is to just make all of the
as-yet unseen variants in the lab. Because DNA synthesis is now relatively
inexpensive, scientists can synthesize [all possible
mutations](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5131844/) of a gene
and test the effect of each one on that gene’s function. This method, called
‘deep mutational scanning,’ promises to deliver useful datasets to
computational biologists. In 2017, one group of scientists
[predicted](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5590843/) that deep
mutational scanning data will eventually be available for all genes and
regulatory elements in the human genome. While this field is still new, the
data produced over the next few years will be a valuable resource for
computational biologists building deep learning models.

While most deep learning models of genetic variants are still built by
academic labs, a few companies are applying deep learning models to develop
new therapies. [Deep Genomics](https://www.deepgenomics.com/company/), founded
by University of Toronto professor Brendan Frey, is seeking to use deep
learning models to develop drugs that target specific genetic variants.
Because of genetic variants, different patients with the same disease often
don’t benefit from the same drug, but it is not always clear which variants
cause patients to respond differently. Deep Genomics is using machine learning
to pick out the relevant variants and develop drugs to target them. The
ultimate goal is to have therapies that are more effective, because they are
tailored to a patient’s genetic makeup.

Like nearly every type of business and research field today, geneticists have
produced datasets that are too complex and too large to be analyzed by human
intuition or even traditional statistics. Much of the future of medicine
depends on understanding the human genome – and that understanding
increasingly depends on machine learning.

## Expert Columnist

 **Michael White** is an assistant professor of genetics at Washington
University School of Medicine in St. Louis, Missouri. In the lab, he works on
developing new biotechnologies and understanding the mechanics of gene
regulation. He previously wrote a science column for Pacific Standard.

Expert Contributor Network

Built In’s expert contributor network publishes thoughtful, solutions-oriented
stories and commentary written by innovative tech professionals. It is the
tech industry’s definitive destination for sharing compelling, first-person
accounts of problem-solving on the road to innovation.

