---
title: "VCs see opportunities for gaming infrastructure startups and incumbents" 
date: 2020-05-08 
draft: false 
---

Story source:

https://techcrunch.com/2020/05/08/startup-opportunities-in-gaming-infrastructure/


# VCs see opportunities for gaming infrastructure startups and incumbents

As the infrastructure for developing games becomes more advanced, studios have
turned to buying best-in-class technology from others instead of building
everything from scratch (often with inferior quality).

This shift underpinned [Unity’s rise as the most popular game
engine](https://techcrunch.com/2019/10/17/how-unity-built-the-worlds-most-
popular-game-engine/). The current focus on games as [ever-evolving social
hubs](https://techcrunch.com/2020/02/25/games-already-are-social-networks/)
that can remain popular for a decade requires investment in “live ops” to keep
updating the game with new features and experiences, only adding to a game
studio’s responsibilities.

There are big movements in gaming right now to make games cross-platform (not
just restricted to mobile or PC or one console), incorporate new types of chat
(in-game or outside of it) and to automatically remove bullies and bots among
other things. [Optimizing games’ virtual
economies](https://techcrunch.com/2020/03/01/virtual-world-economies-will-
unlock-a-whole-new-world-of-business-opportunities/) is only getting more
complex as trade of virtual goods becomes increasingly popular.

All this means more opportunity for startups (and large incumbents) that
provide new tools and platforms to game developers and gamers. To gauge which
opportunities are prime for entrepreneurs, I asked four leading early-stage
investors who focus on the gaming sector to share their analysis:

  * Sam Englebardt, Galaxy Interactive
  * Gigi Levy Weiss, NFX
  * Amit Kumar, Accel
  * Anton Backman, Play Ventures

## **Sam Englebardt, Galaxy Interactive**

**Which areas within gaming infrastructure seem firmly dominated by large
incumbents, versus open for new startups to rise up?**

I’m always rooting for the startup, but some of the really big and expensive
infrastructure challenges seem unlikely to be solved by a startup, especially
where the incumbents have a lead in time, money and the personnel they’re
throwing at the problem. I’m thinking here, for example, about something like
cloud computing, storage solutions, etc.

