---
title: Privacy UX: Better Cookie Consent Experiences 
date: 2019-05-22 
draft: false 
---

Story source:

https://www.smashingmagazine.com/2019/04/privacy-ux-better-cookie-consent-experiences/


[](/author/vitaly-friedman)

### About The Author

Vitaly Friedman loves beautiful content and doesn’t like to give in easily.
When he is not writing or speaking at a conference, he’s most probably running
… [More about Vitaly…](/author/vitaly-friedman)

This series of articles is about privacy-related design patterns. We’ll be
exploring some of the respectful ways to approach privacy and data collection,
and how to deal with those notorious cookie consent prompts, intrusive push
notifications, glorious permission requests, malicious third-party tracking
and offboarding experience.

With the advent of the EU _General Data Protection Regulation_ (GDPR) in May
2018, the web has turned into a vast exhibition of consent pop-ups,
notifications, toolbars, and modals. While the intent of most cookie-related
prompts is the same — to get a user’s consent to keep collecting and
evaluating their behavior the same ol’ way they’ve been doing for years —
implementations differ significantly, often making it ridiculously difficult
or simply impossible for customers to opt out from tracking.

On top of that, many implementations don’t even respect users’ decisions
anyway and set cookies despite their choices, assuming that most people will
grant consent regardless.

Admittedly, they aren’t entirely wrong. In our research, the vast majority of
users willingly **provide consent without reading the cookie notice at all**.
The reason is obvious and understandable: many customers expect that a website
“probably wouldn’t work, or the content wouldn’t be accessible otherwise.” Of
course, that’s not necessarily true, but users can’t know for sure unless they
try it out. In reality, though, nobody wants to play ping-pong with the cookie
consent prompt, and so they **click the consent away** by choosing the most
obvious option: “OK.”

 **Note** : _It’s important to understand that cookies and consent mechanisms
discussed in this article go beyond GDPR. In Europe, they are addressed by a
separate piece of legislation, the ePrivacy Directive, which is currently in
draft for a revamp (as of April 2019). It may be finalized by summer 2019. We
do not know what its final form will take, but it will determine the future of
cookie consent prompts._

Now, with this common behavior online, what might come across is that cookie
prompts aren’t particularly useful, and that’s partly true. But they certainly
helped raise awareness about privacy and data collection on the web. In fact,
users now know that websites track their data, which they weren’t aware of a
few years ago. But they often see it as a necessary evil in exchange for
accessing the content “for free.”

It’s not that users always happily share their personal data, but they don’t
really feel that revoking consent is a viable alternative. To many of them,
the only reasonable option is to provide consent while opting in for an ad-
blocker extension or any other tracking blocker in their browser.

[![oreo
website](https://res.cloudinary.com/indysigner/image/fetch/f_auto,q_auto/w_400/https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/7e485ba1-c964-48e1-b4ac-
ed5de53155d6/01-oreo.png)](https://www.oreo.com/)Cookie consent pop-ups don’t
have to be tiny and unreadable. We could try to integrate them into our
overall experience too. Case in point: [Oreo](https://www.oreo.com/), with an
Oreo’s cookie displayed as a cookie consent prompt. ([Large
preview](https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/7e485ba1-c964-48e1-b4ac-ed5de53155d6/01-oreo.png))

Since cookie consent prompts **always stand in the way** of the content, they
are often dismissed almost instinctively, not unlike carousels during
onboarding. Hence, from the designer’s perspective, spending weeks refining
that _one-of-a-kind_ prompt might be a waste of time. (Sorry for crushing your
dreams at this point.)

[![Iamsterdam.com
cookies](https://res.cloudinary.com/indysigner/image/fetch/f_auto,q_auto/w_400/https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/d5229f18-d3d7-4c12-887e-c2e729fd3ea5/iamsterdam-examples-
a-b.png)](https://www.iamsterdam.com/en)[Iamsterdam.com](https://www.iamsterdam.com/en)
allows visitors to adjust cookie settings and explains the different types of
cookies, with an option to easily opt out from certain ones. ([Large
preview](https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/d5229f18-d3d7-4c12-887e-c2e729fd3ea5/iamsterdam-examples-
a-b.png))

Since many websites heavily rely on collecting data, running A/B tests, and
serving users with targeted advertising, often the design of the cookie
consent notice is heavily influenced by business requirements and business
goals. Is it acceptable for the business to allow users to quickly dismiss all
tracking? Which cookies are (apparently) required for the site to work, and
which ones are optional? Which cookies should be selected for approval by
default, and which ones would require a manual opt-in? Should the customer be
able to easily revoke the consent once it’s provided, and if so, how exactly
would it be done if they don’t have an account on the site?

These business decisions have a major impact on design decisions, although
from the user’s side, the optimal design would be quite obvious: **no cookie
consent at all**. That would mean, for example, that users could define
privacy settings in their browsers, and choose what cookies they’d like to
provide consent to. The browser would then send a hint to each website a user
chooses to visit and automatically opt-in or opt-out cookie settings,
depending on the provided preferences.

> [Users now know that websites track their data, which they weren’t aware of
a few years ago. But they often see it as a necessary evil in exchange for
accessing the content “for
free.”](http://twitter.com/share?text=Users%20now%20know%20that%20websites%20track%20their%20data,%20which%20they%20weren%e2%80%99t%20aware%20of%20a%20few%20years%20ago.%20But%20they%20often%20see%20it%20as%20a%20necessary%20evil%20in%20exchange%20for%20accessing%20the%20content%20%e2%80%9cfor%20free.%e2%80%9d%0a&url=https://smashingmagazine.com%2f2019%2f04%2fprivacy-
ux-better-cookie-consent-experiences%2f)

In fact, a [Do Not Track (DNT) header](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-
US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/DNT) is already implemented and widely supported by
browsers (although it was removed from Safari to prevent potential use for
fingerprinting), yet there is no established mechanism for transforming this
preference into a granular selection of accepted cookie groups. It shouldn’t
be very surprising that most advertisers wouldn’t be particularly happy about
this pattern gaining traction either, but perhaps it could be a slightly
better way forward, as preferred by users, to no cookie consent at all.

Admittedly, users sometimes find a way around anyway. Some users who already
use an ad-blocker are using a [cookie prompt blocker](https://www.i-dont-care-
about-cookies.eu/) as well. The latter, however, usually grants full consent
on user’s behalf by default. Obviously, it goes against the very purpose of
the cookie prompt in the first place, and ideally such extensions would
automatically **opt in only for essential cookies** while opting out for
everything else (if it’s possible at all).

As designers, though, we have a legal obligation to explain what happens to a
user’s data and how it will be stored within the mandate of provided business
requirements. As Geoffrey Keating mentioned in his article, “[The Cookie Law
and UX](https://medium.com/@geoffreykeating/cookies-9f1270110597),” focusing
specifically on legislation in Ireland, according to the Office of the Data
Protection Commissioner, “the minimum requirement is clear communication to
the user as to what he/she is being asked to consent to in terms of cookies
usage and a means of giving or refusing consent.”

It’s worth noting that consent has to be “unambiguous” and “freely given,” as
it must “leave no doubt as to the data subject’s intention, should be an
active indication of the user’s wishes and can only be valid if the data
subject is able to exercise a real choice.” Hence, silent, pre-ticked
checkboxes or inactivity shouldn’t constitute consent.

This might sound obvious, but some solutions explore the uncharted legal
territory that’s left for interpretation. For instance, sometimes the website
visitor “automatically submits a cookie consent by clicking a link on the
website”, and sometimes you can choose which actions are “obvious enough” for
you to perceive them as a silent consent. Obviously, this isn’t an informed
decision and such technique rightly belongs to the realm of mischievous
culprits that should be avoided at all costs.

With this in mind, there are a couple of options we could consider:

#### Avoid Optional Cookies And Keep Only Functional Ones: No Prompt Required

It might appear that every single website needs to display a cookie consent
notice to their European visitors, but if your website doesn’t collect, track,
and evaluate any personal data from users, or it collects only anonymous data,
you may not need one. In fact, one of the fundamental principles of the
[Privacy by Design
framework](https://www.smashingmagazine.com/2017/07/privacy-by-design-
framework/) is that non-essential cookies should be off by default and the
user needs to actively opt in.

Now, cookies might be required for maintaining the logged-in state or user
preferences, for example, and according to EU regulations you don’t need
explicit consent for that. That’s also why many prompts have functional
cookies enabled by default, without an option to disable them. And some sites,
like GOV.UK, merely inform users about cookies, not requiring any input at
all, but also not providing a choice to opt out from the optional Google
Analytics cookie.

[![gov.uk](https://res.cloudinary.com/indysigner/image/fetch/f_auto,q_auto/w_400/https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/8889f5bc-4238-4dde-b158-d7ea23766799/04-gov-
uk.png)](https://www.gov.uk/help/cookies)GOV.UK [stores at least 18
cookies](https://www.gov.uk/help/cookies), and many of them are required for
better experience; e.g. to track progress when applying for a licence,
multivariate testing, making secure connections to websites, YouTube videos,
email subscription updates. However, only one cookie is optional: Google
Analytics (anonymized). ([Large
preview](https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/8889f5bc-4238-4dde-b158-d7ea23766799/04-gov-uk.png))

#### Nudging Users Towards Implicit Consent

Not every website can get away without ad-related third-party cookies, though.
One seemingly light way out would be to add a plain notification such as “By
using our website, you are consenting to our use of cookies.” But this alone
isn’t enough. As we need an active indication of the user’s consent, we have
to require some sort of unambiguous action. For that reason, some sites add a
“close” icon, making the consent box appear as a notification that can be
dismissed. To ensure a more obvious acknowledgement, it’s a good idea to
replace the “close” icon with a button. In many implementations, the button
would simply say “Close” or “Save” or “Continue,” although “Accept and
continue” is more clear.

In most cases, the notification doesn’t disappear until it is acted upon,
hence being the very first thing that users see when visiting _any_ page on
the website. **Do you need user consent on every page, though?** You could be
more selective and ask for the cookie consent only when it’s actually
required; for example, when the user is setting up an account or wants to save
their settings.

[![twitter
website](https://res.cloudinary.com/indysigner/image/fetch/f_auto,q_auto/w_400/https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/48a34ff5-6af2-4d43-bcb1-369fd3d4fec1/05-twitter.png)](https://twitter.com/)
Twitter informs its visitors about the cookies used, but there is no option to
adjust cookie preferences. The prompt will be clicked away by clicking on the
‘×’ in the top-right corner. Beware, however: some people see it as consent,
while others see it as postponing the decision for a later time, similar to
snoozing notifications. ([Large
preview](https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/48a34ff5-6af2-4d43-bcb1-369fd3d4fec1/05-twitter.png))[![resharper](https://res.cloudinary.com/indysigner/image/fetch/f_auto,q_auto/w_400/https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/448e7882-046e-4ebc-b7e8-878b6377c89b/06-resharper.png)](https://www.jetbrains.com/resharper/)[JetBrains](https://www.jetbrains.com/resharper/)
chose to display a plain text-only prompt as if it were in a terminal window.
There are balanced options to opt in or opt out of cookie consent. ([Large
preview](https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/448e7882-046e-4ebc-b7e8-878b6377c89b/06-resharper.png))

#### Allowing Users To Adjust Privacy Settings

While the previous option dictates complete obedience or complete lock-out,
you could be more empathetic to the user’s intent. The user might have strong
feelings about the exposure of their personal data, so providing a way out —
not dissimilar to the personal questions we mentioned earlier — could keep
them on the site. To achieve that, we could add an option to change settings,
followed by an overview of different groups of cookies, with some of them
being required for the site to function flawlessly, and others being optional.

The grouping could relate to the purpose of cookies such as advertising,
analytics and statistics, or testing. It could also be much broader, allowing
users to choose between “I am OK with personalized ads” or “I do not want to
see personalized ads”. It’s also a good idea to explain to the user which
features on the site will be unavailable once a certain group of cookies is
blocked. TrustArc does that with a slider, allowing for a number of privacy
levels, from allowing only required cookies to functional cookies to
advertising cookies, while also showing its impact on the overall
functionality of the site.

[![nngroup](https://res.cloudinary.com/indysigner/image/fetch/f_auto,q_auto/w_400/https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/74adf23e-66b7-4078-a447-c6a00def7483/07-nngroup.png)](https://www.nngroup.com/)On
[Nielsen Norman group](https://www.nngroup.com/), all cookies are grouped.
Necessary cookies can’t be opted out of, but all other groups can be dismissed
with a few taps. Ideally, there’d be a way to opt out from all optional ones
at once. ([Large
preview](https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/74adf23e-66b7-4078-a447-c6a00def7483/07-nngroup.png))[![mailchimp](https://res.cloudinary.com/indysigner/image/fetch/f_auto,q_auto/w_400/https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/9931fcd2-7743-46aa-8126-ba584178f11a/08-mailchimp.png)](https://mailchimp.com/)Tabbed
groups for cookies on [MailChimp](https://mailchimp.com/). ([Large
preview](https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/9931fcd2-7743-46aa-8126-ba584178f11a/08-mailchimp.png))[![the-
guardian 'your privacy'
page](https://res.cloudinary.com/indysigner/image/fetch/f_auto,q_auto/w_400/https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/6bc16961-6e54-4904-98f1-41b17b23216c/09-the-
guardian-a.png)](https://www.theguardian.com/)([Large
preview](https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/6bc16961-6e54-4904-98f1-41b17b23216c/09-the-
guardian-a.png))[![the-guardian 'your privacy'
page](https://res.cloudinary.com/indysigner/image/fetch/f_auto,q_auto/w_400/https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/7d77b9e2-1972-40a5-b05d-c160e4192b5f/10-the-
guadian-b.png)](https://www.theguardian.com/)[The
Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/) provides clear options which have
equal weight on the 'Your privacy' page (not in the initial prompt, though).
The modal on the front page is large but it provides clear options. ([Large
preview](https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/7d77b9e2-1972-40a5-b05d-c160e4192b5f/10-the-
guadian-b.png))[![the daily mash privacy
settings](https://res.cloudinary.com/indysigner/image/fetch/f_auto,q_auto/w_400/https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/e3785345-7d82-44a1-901d-896f4ebb3b94/daily-mesh-
a-b.png)](https://www.thedailymash.co.uk/)[The Daily
Mash](https://www.thedailymash.co.uk/) provides an option to adjust privacy
settings (albeit de-emphasized), and in the settings panel visitors can easily
reject or accept all cookies. Also, 'Save & Exit' is a very clear label for a
button at the bottom. The experience might not be delightful, but it’s pretty
clear. ([Large
preview](https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/e3785345-7d82-44a1-901d-896f4ebb3b94/daily-mesh-
a-b.png))[![myfitnespal cookies
settings](https://res.cloudinary.com/indysigner/image/fetch/f_auto,q_auto/w_400/https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/acaf923a-f76e-438e-8af7-05eb95c77594/13-myfitnespal.png)](https://www.myfitnesspal.com/)[MyFitnessPal](https://www.myfitnesspal.com/),
powered by TrustArc, displays a slider which explains which functionality is
allowed or disallowed with every group of cookies. ([Large
preview](https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/acaf923a-f76e-438e-8af7-05eb95c77594/13-myfitnespal.png))[![cookies
settings](https://res.cloudinary.com/indysigner/image/fetch/f_auto,q_auto/w_400/https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/bb8475ad-558e-4e6d-9c00-abd9428edc23/mockup-settings-
indiewebcamp.jpg)](https://indieweb.org/)A fantastic pattern on how a cookie
settings dashboard could be designed to improve transparency. A mock-up by
[Matthias Ott](https://twitter.com/m_ott/status/1115200620762472448/photo/1)
and [Joschi Kuphal](https://jkphl.is/) built at the last
[@indiewebcamp](https://twitter.com/indiewebcamp/) in Dusseldorf. You can also
[download the Adobe XD source
file](https://xd.adobe.com/view/4894b0fa-a07a-4651-5ce8-efde5ac3d835-3ea5/),
kindly provided by the authors. ([Large
preview](https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/0066d314-9095-4ad2-8184-cff291f8b925/mockup-settings-
indiewebcamp.png))

#### A Subtle Or Prominent Display Of The Request For Consent

In terms of layout, the prompt could be subtle and hardly noticeable, or
obvious and difficult to ignore. We could place it in the header of the page,
or at the bottom of the viewport, or we could also position it in the center
of the page as a modal. All of these options could be floating and persistent
as the user scrolls the page, thereby blocking access to a portion of the
content (or entire content) until consent is granted.

[De Telegraaf](https://www.telegraaf.nl/), for example, places a verbose
cookie consent in the middle of the page, blurring out the content underneath,
literally hijacking the page and standing in the way. It shouldn’t be a big
revelation that from all the options we’ve tested, this one seems to be the
most annoying one to users. In general, subtle prompts should be preferred,
and the less space they need to be displayed, the better the overall user’s
reaction has been.

[![telegraaf cookie consent
prompt](https://res.cloudinary.com/indysigner/image/fetch/f_auto,q_auto/w_400/https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/9fd16988-88a1-4aaf-83cb-b6c09530aaea/16-telegraaf.png)](https://www.telegraaf.nl/)It’s
becoming common to blur out the content while displaying a cookie consent
prompt. This technique brings focus to the prompt, but it also makes visitors
more likely to click it away, often trading privacy for access to content. A
slightly more subtle prompt would be more effective and helpful as users might
browse around and leave without committing. Example:
[Telegraaf.nl](https://www.telegraaf.nl/). ([Large
preview](https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/9fd16988-88a1-4aaf-83cb-b6c09530aaea/16-telegraaf.png))[![pathe
cookie consent
prompt](https://res.cloudinary.com/indysigner/image/fetch/f_auto,q_auto/w_400/https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/01200cba-9eb8-42d5-912a-928f8f0abe96/17-pathe.png)](https://www.pathe.nl/)Blurring
out the content is rarely a good idea. Also, there’s a very clear primary
action and secondary action in play here. It doesn’t look like a fair choice
between the two options. Example: [Pathe.nl](https://www.pathe.nl/). ([Large
preview](https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/01200cba-9eb8-42d5-912a-928f8f0abe96/17-pathe.png))[![empire-
bio cookie
consent](https://res.cloudinary.com/indysigner/image/fetch/f_auto,q_auto/w_400/https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/da533612-7365-42ef-95a6-f392773eae0b/18-empire-
bio.png)](https://www.empirebio.dk/)Can you spot the cookie? A little
notification in the bottom-right corner asks for the user’s consent on
[Empirebio.dk](https://www.empirebio.dk/). ([Large
preview](https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/da533612-7365-42ef-95a6-f392773eae0b/18-empire-
bio.png))[![hoistgroup
cookie](https://res.cloudinary.com/indysigner/image/fetch/f_auto,q_auto/w_400/https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/06752a47-2f56-462e-ae8a-1246cce56664/19-hoistgroup.png)](https://www.hoistgroup.com/)On
[HoistGroup](https://www.hoistgroup.com/), there is no way to dismiss cookies
— they are required, and there is no way out. ([Large
preview](https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/06752a47-2f56-462e-ae8a-1246cce56664/19-hoistgroup.png))[![zeitonline
cookie](https://res.cloudinary.com/indysigner/image/fetch/f_auto,q_auto/w_400/https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/f3839bda-0d6c-46c8-bb27-c8b321cab59e/20-zeitonline.png)](https://jobs.zeit.de/)On
[Zeit Online](https://jobs.zeit.de/), there is no way to dismiss cookies —
they are required, and there is no way out. ([Large
preview](https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/f3839bda-0d6c-46c8-bb27-c8b321cab59e/20-zeitonline.png))[![ticketveiling
cookie
prompt](https://res.cloudinary.com/indysigner/image/fetch/f_auto,q_auto/w_400/https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/e7e0ca46-ba45-4a99-be52-a05040435e97/21-ticketveiling.png)](https://www.ticketveiling.nl/)[Ticketveiling.nl](https://www.ticketveiling.nl/)
displays a cookie prompt at the bottom, but also a chat widget. Only one
interviewed person expected that the chat was here to provide help with the
cookie settings. It’s probably a good idea to not display the widget alongside
the cookie display prompt, though. ([Large
preview](https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/e7e0ca46-ba45-4a99-be52-a05040435e97/21-ticketveiling.png))

#### Appearance And Wording On Buttons

We also need to give some thought to the appearance of the consent form,
especially to the design of buttons and the wording on those buttons. Wording
such as “Just proceed” or “Save and Exit” or “Continue using the site” nudges
users to move on with a default option, and in fact, many users are likely to
do just that. It’s more respectful to have two buttons, a primary one for
granting consent, and a secondary one for adjusting settings, with both
buttons having neutral microcopy such as “Accept” and “Reject,” or “Okay” and
“No, thanks.” That’s the path we’ve chosen with Smashing Magazine.

[![smashing cookie
options](https://res.cloudinary.com/indysigner/image/fetch/f_auto,q_auto/w_400/https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/6965d1a1-a102-4147-bb08-48ba706437f8/22-smashing.png)](https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/6965d1a1-a102-4147-bb08-48ba706437f8/22-smashing.png)Accept
or dismiss. It shouldn’t be harder than that. ([Large
preview](https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/6965d1a1-a102-4147-bb08-48ba706437f8/22-smashing.png))[![nhs
options for
cookies](https://res.cloudinary.com/indysigner/image/fetch/f_auto,q_auto/w_400/https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/da0ddbfd-4693-492e-abb6-02ad648c02e7/23-nhs-a.png)](https://www.nhs.uk/)[NHS](https://www.nhs.uk/)
provides very clear options to accept cookies or 'Turn cookies off'. ([Large
preview](https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/da0ddbfd-4693-492e-abb6-02ad648c02e7/23-nhs-a.png))[![nhs
cookie
settings](https://res.cloudinary.com/indysigner/image/fetch/f_auto,q_auto/w_400/https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/2a5d0e31-64b4-484e-bf93-662be810a5b5/23-nhs-b.png)](https://www.nhs.uk/our-
policies/cookies-policy/)Large radio buttons to select what kind of cookies
the visitor accepts. A fantastic example of privacy settings designed in an
honest and transparent way. The only missing bit is to opt out from all
optional cookies by default. Example: [NHS](https://www.nhs.uk/our-
policies/cookies-policy/). ([Large
preview](https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/2a5d0e31-64b4-484e-bf93-662be810a5b5/23-nhs-b.png))[![fandom
cookie
choice](https://res.cloudinary.com/indysigner/image/fetch/f_auto,q_auto/w_400/https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/fd8d199a-f9da-49cb-a94c-01808c3aeb34/24-fandom.png)](https://www.fandom.com/)Accept
or reject with a single tap, although both options don’t have the same weight.
Example: [Fandom.com](https://www.fandom.com/). ([Large
preview](https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/fd8d199a-f9da-49cb-a94c-01808c3aeb34/24-fandom.png))

It shouldn’t be surprising that of all the options, users feel surprisingly
pleased and appreciative of the option to reject all cookies with a single
click on a button. Some users were surprised that this option was even
provided, and while a majority chose to grant consent, every fifth user
refused consent. By doing so, they assumed the website would be fully
functional without cookies, and rightfully so.

### Adjusting Cookie Preferences

Not many users would consider revoking or adjusting cookie settings after
granting consent, but when asked to do so, they expected to find the options
in the header or the footer of the website, either in the privacy policy or in
the cookie policy. It’s not very surprising, and of course that’s where we
need to place the options to adjust settings should the user wish to do so.

[![jamie-oliver cookie
preferences](https://res.cloudinary.com/indysigner/image/fetch/f_auto,q_auto/w_400/https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/94695907-73e1-4fab-aedd-21af3075a453/24b-jamie-
oliver.png)](https://www.jamieoliver.com/)([Large
preview](https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/94695907-73e1-4fab-aedd-21af3075a453/24b-jamie-
oliver.png))[![jamie-oliver cookie
preferences](https://res.cloudinary.com/indysigner/image/fetch/f_auto,q_auto/w_400/https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/7573e42f-2296-46b7-8961-8749bcc378bb/24c-jamie-
oliver.png)](https://www.jamieoliver.com/)By default, all options on the
[Jamie Oliver website](https://www.jamieoliver.com/) are off, with an option
to turn them on. However, the main call-to-action button is 'Accept
recommended settings', which turns all toggles to on. The option to proceed
without cookies is positioned at the very bottom of the page, with a subtle
'Close'. It’s probably not obvious enough, and another button on the top would
be more helpful. ([Large
preview](https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/7573e42f-2296-46b7-8961-8749bcc378bb/24c-jamie-oliver.png))

### Users Understand When They Are Being Tricked

So far, the entire experience should be quite straightforward, right? Well, if
a business model heavily relies on collecting and tracking data, you might be
forced into shady areas when selecting anything but the easiest option is
confusing and generates a lot of work. In our interviews, users could easily
see through the companies’ agendas, even saying something along the lines of
“Ah, I see what you did there.” Some things were less obvious than others,
though.

Whenever the cookie consent suggested an option to review cookies or adjust
cookie settings, users expected to see an overview of all cookies and be able
to adjust which cookies should be allowed to be set and which not. In terms of
interface design, usually it’s done with tabbed sections within a cookie
consent widget, with some groups selected by default. It’s common to see
functional cookies, analytics cookies, advertising cookies, and website
settings cookies. This level of granular control isn’t often expected but it’s
considered to be helpful and friendly, and as such preferred — however, only
if the entire category of cookies could be unselected at once, with a single
tap on a single checkbox.

Oddly enough, some implementations go to extremes, providing users with an
overwhelming overview of every single cookie set by third parties. It’s not
uncommon for all of them to be opted in by default, and opting out requires a
tap on every single one of them, one by one. It might not seem like a big deal
with five cookies, but it’s a monstrosity with over 250 cookies generously
provided by dozens of trackers on the site. In such cases, many users gave up
after a few opt-outs, providing full access to their data and moving on.

[![kayak cookie
prompt](https://res.cloudinary.com/indysigner/image/fetch/f_auto,q_auto/w_400/https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/9929a3f0-87d3-45ff-
ba1a-1ff43ada2720/25-kayak.png)](https://www.kayak.co.uk/)What would you
expect to happen when clicking on the 'close' icon? How is a click on a button
different from a click on the cross? Is there a difference? On
[Kayak](https://www.kayak.co.uk/), users were confused during the test.
([Large
preview](https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/9929a3f0-87d3-45ff-ba1a-1ff43ada2720/25-kayak.png))

Unfortunately, that’s just scratching the surface. Imagine a cookie settings
prompt with a “Close ×” button. What behavior would you expect from clicking
“Close”? Would you expect the prompt to be dismissed and then eventually
reappear? Or would you expect all tracking scripts to be opted out by default?
Opted in? Unsurprisingly, most users weren’t even thinking that far — they
just wanted the pop-up to disappear. Nobody expected the trackers to be opted
out by default, yet many users felt that it was a “temporary thing” that would
show up again “at some point.” In practice, almost all of the time, closing
the prompt was perceived by website owners as user consent and, in fact, all
cookies were stored to their full extent. That’s not necessarily what the user
was expecting.

[![speisekarte privacy
policy](https://res.cloudinary.com/indysigner/image/fetch/f_auto,q_auto/w_400/https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/240669ec-b218-4a4c-bb84-df7a2b123766/example-speisekarte-
a-b.jpg)](https://www.speisekarte.de/)A slightly confusing experience on
[Speisekarte.de](https://www.speisekarte.de/), with an option to accept or
‘deselect all’ options in the top-left corner, in the same color, with a
delimiter `>` in between. Also, the wording ‘Agree and Proceed’ or ‘Learn
more’ isn’t obvious. ([Large
preview](https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/bef6e6a4-bb77-426a-b9f5-c94541e709bb/example-speisekarte-
a-b.png))

The wording on buttons and links caused major confusion for users. On
[Speisekarte.de](https://www.speisekarte.de/), you can either “Agree and
Proceed” (primary, large green button) or “Learn more” (subtle grey link, not
even underlined). What would you expect to appear after clicking “Learn More”?
While many users expect a privacy policy to appear, the action actually
prompts the management of cookies, with 405 ad selection, delivery, and
reporting partners, 446 information storage and access partners, 274 content
selection, delivery, and reporting partners, 372 measurement partners and 355
personalization partners. “Agree and Proceed” grants access to the storage and
evaluation of customers’ personal data for 1,852 partners. That’s not too
shabby, isn’t it?

It’s not obvious that the listing area for all those partners is scrollable at
all, and there is no obvious way to unselect all of them. Would you find it
enjoyable to manually opt out 1,852 toggles, one by one? Probably not. As it
turns out, you can “deselect all” partners in the top-left corner of the
window — however, this option is conveniently presented in a way that
resembles breadcrumb navigation rather than a button. And, of course, all
partners are opted in by default. That’s deceptive, dishonest, and
disrespectful.

Once you get into **the habit of rejecting cookies by default** , you can find
a number of shady and questionable practices that seem to be widespread.
Sometimes companies place Facebook and Twitter tracking cookies in the
“Necessary” category. Sometimes the option to reject cookies is conveniently
hidden behind an extra “Manage” option. And sometimes there is an option to
opt out from analytics, but a user is automatically opted in for “Anonymous
analytics.”

Some companies go beyond that, inventing new ways of making business should
the user wish to avoid tracking. Sometimes it shows up with a “Premium EU
Subscription” without on-site advertising and tracking scripts, and sometimes
with a website being unavailable, or an “EU experience” (which, frankly, is
much faster and lightweight than its non-EU counterpart). Not a single person
accessing the site appreciated either of these options. That shouldn’t be a
big revelation, but there is a significant amount of users who, being
confronted with such treatment, have nothing left but to leave the site in
search for alternatives.

[![usa-today EU
experience](https://res.cloudinary.com/indysigner/image/fetch/f_auto,q_auto/w_400/https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/32f6ffb8-e09a-44d7-8a3b-47887d897325/28-usa-
today.png)](https://eu.usatoday.com/)[USA Today](https://eu.usatoday.com/)
provides an EU experience which happens to be much cleaner and faster than the
original one. For EU visitors, the 'site does not collect personally
identifiable information or persistent identifiers from, deliver a
personalized experience to, or otherwise track or monitor persons reasonably
identified as visiting our Site from the European Union.' ([Large
preview](https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/32f6ffb8-e09a-44d7-8a3b-47887d897325/28-usa-
today.png))[![the-washington-post Premium EU
Subscription](https://res.cloudinary.com/indysigner/image/fetch/f_auto,q_auto/w_400/https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/faccbfe7-a6ed-441f-ab83-fa31427e350a/29-the-washington-
post.png)](https://www.washingtonpost.com/)[The Washington
Post](https://www.washingtonpost.com/) has introduced a 'Premium EU
Subscription' that doesn’t contain any on-site advertising or third-party ad
tracking. ([Large
preview](https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/faccbfe7-a6ed-441f-ab83-fa31427e350a/29-the-washington-
post.png))[![los-angeles-times' message stating that the website was
unavailable in most European
countries](https://res.cloudinary.com/indysigner/image/fetch/f_auto,q_auto/w_400/https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/760e2a68-9545-4466-89da-ef496ce7d3a4/30-los-angeles-
times.png)](https://www.latimes.com/)For a while, [Los Angeles
Times](https://www.latimes.com/) displayed a message stating that the website
was unavailable in most European countries. ([Large
preview](https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/760e2a68-9545-4466-89da-ef496ce7d3a4/30-los-angeles-
times.png))

### Guidelines And Strategies For Better Design

According to the EU regulation, each cookie, its provider, purpose, expiry
date, and type should be explained and elaborated in detail in a privacy
policy, and many services such as TrustArc, IAB Consent Framework, Cookiebot,
OneTrust, Cookie Consent, and [many others](https://www.cookiechoices.org/)
provide this feature out of the box. They also provide an option to customize
which groups of cookies should be presented as choices to the user, and while
the default experience is decent, often it can be used to make it
unnecessarily difficult for the customer to adjust their settings.

[![sourceforge privacy
settings](https://res.cloudinary.com/indysigner/image/fetch/f_auto,q_auto/w_400/https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/4e8b31a5-7082-447c-b7bb-
bc3a7ed16246/31-sourceforge-a.png)](https://sourceforge.net/)([Large
preview](https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/4e8b31a5-7082-447c-b7bb-
bc3a7ed16246/31-sourceforge-a.png))[![sourceforge privacy
settings](https://res.cloudinary.com/indysigner/image/fetch/f_auto,q_auto/w_400/https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/c4a299e6-adb9-42f7-a9d9-fa7da873ff1d/32-sourceforge-b.png)](https://sourceforge.net/)([Large
preview](https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/c4a299e6-adb9-42f7-a9d9-fa7da873ff1d/32-sourceforge-b.png))[![sourceforge
privacy
settings](https://res.cloudinary.com/indysigner/image/fetch/f_auto,q_auto/w_400/https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/aaeb69e1-99c6-4602-8801-6b743a7651e8/33-sourceforge-c.png)](https://sourceforge.net/)Clear
options, honest experience, transparent interface. A great example on
[Sourceforge](https://sourceforge.net/). ([Large
preview](https://cloud.netlifyusercontent.com/assets/344dbf88-fdf9-42bb-
adb4-46f01eedd629/aaeb69e1-99c6-4602-8801-6b743a7651e8/33-sourceforge-c.png))

At the end of the day, we need to provide good experiences while also
achieving our business goals. We can do that with a series of steps:

  1. We need to audit and group all cookies required on the site;
  2. We need to decide how each of these groups would be labelled, which ones would be required, and which would be optional;
  3. We need to understand what impact disabling a group of cookies would have on the functionality of the site, and communicate each choice to the user;
  4. Last but not least, we need to decide what settings should be selected by default, and what customization options we want to present to the user.

The simplest design pattern seems to be obvious. If you need user consent,
display a narrow notification notice in the header or at the bottom of the
viewport. No need to blur out or darken the content to make the notification
noticeable; just make sure it doesn’t blend in with the rest of the site. If
possible, **allow users to accept or reject cookies with two obvious buttons**
: “Okay” and “No, thanks.” Otherwise, provide an option to adjust settings,
following an overview of cookie categories. There, you have to make obvious
the consequences each choice has on the website functionality, and enable
users to “Approve all” or “Reject all” cookies at once — for the entire site,
and for each category.

Where to place the notification notice? The position doesn’t seem to really
matter — it didn’t make any difference in decision-making. The overlay
covering half of the page, however, was perceived as the most annoying option
— and it shouldn’t be too surprising as it literally blocks a large portion of
the content on the page. Most users almost instinctively know what they are
presented with, and they also know what action they’d prefer to take to get on
with the site, so lengthy explanations are ignored or dismissed as swiftly as
push notifications or permission requests.

In the [next article](https://www.smashingmagazine.com/2019/04/privacy-better-
notifications-ux-permission-requests/) of the series, we’ll look into
notifications UX and permission requests, and how we can design the experience
around them better — and with user’s privacy in mind.

 _A kind thank you to[Heather
Burns](https://www.smashingmagazine.com/author/heatherburns/) for reviewing
this article before publication._

![Smashing Editorial](https://www.smashingmagazine.com/images/logo/logo--
red.png) (yk, il)

