---
title: Confusing Terms in Container Ecosystem 
date: 2019-05-22 
draft: false 
---

Story source:

https://krsoninikhil.github.io/2019/04/05/confusing-terms-in-container-ecosystem/


# Confusing Terms In Container Ecosystem

05 Apr 2019

Containers are great, in fact, software components which enable them are some
of my favorite projects. But the more you try to know about how they work, the
more terminology gets confusing. Docker, Docker Engine, containerd, runC, rkt,
cri-o – all describing themselves are container runtime, are they alternatives
or complementary components? Based on my understanding while trying to
contribute to one of these projects, I’ve summarized these terms below. This
assumes you’ve used containers before. If you have any suggestions, please
[let me know](/contact).

Going bottom-up, Open Container Initiative or OCI is a project by Linux
Foundation which standardizes the container runtime, image and distribution
specifications, these specifications are released as [runtime-
spec](https://github.com/opencontainers/runtime-spec), [image-
spec](https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec) and [distribution-
spec](https://github.com/opencontainers/distribution-spec) respectively.

[runC](https://github.com/opencontainers/runc) is one of the many
implementations of `runtime-spec`, other implementations can be found
[here](https://github.com/opencontainers/runtime-
spec/blob/master/implementations.md). Now given the specs, these
implementations have very limited and defined scope in container world i.e.
`runc` can create, start and delete a container. Generally, a more
comprehensive runtime will be required in real systems and can be implemented
on top of `runC`. This runtime would be responsible for managing multiple
containers at a time and things like downloading container images, managing
storage and network interfaces, etc. Widely used example of this runtime is
`containerd` which can manage multiple containers using runC or any other OCI
implementation. Check this [post by Michael
Crosby](https://blog.docker.com/2016/04/docker-containerd-integration/) to
know more about how `containerd` integrates `runC`.

Another runtime is [cri-o](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cri-o) by
[Kubernetes](https://kubernetes.io/) which is OCI implementation with just
enough functionality that is required by Kubernetes CRI. CRI or Container
Runtime Interface is a Kubernetes interface for using any runtime with its
container manager called `kubelet`. That means, `containerd` and `cri-o` are
alternative runtimes for using with `kubelet`.

Now, `kubelet` and Docker Engine are a higher level abstractions that use and
depend on above-mentioned runtimes. Docker Engine uses `containerd` and adds
things like networking, volumes and security to the containers.

Following image shows how these pieces fit together visually.

![Container Ecosystem](https://i2.wp.com/blog.docker.com/wp-
content/uploads/974cd631-b57e-470e-a944-78530aaa1a23-1.jpg?w=906&ssl=1)
_Source:<https://blog.docker.com/2017/08/what-is-containerd-runtime/>_

Docker, the company, also provides an end-user CLI client `docker` to interact
with Docker Engine and what we use directly on our local systems to manage
containers. Don’t be confused if Docker, containerd and runC all are described
as runtimes, they are classified as runtimes but with different and very
defined scopes.

Another interesting project is the Moby Project, which you might have come
across if you’ve been reading about these components. So, earlier Docker used
to be a huge piece of software by Docker, the company. With time, they
separated out the major components like `containerd` which can be used and
developed independently. All these components that Docker now uses as upstream
along with some tools and framework to assemble them, comes under this [Moby
Project](https://mobyproject.org/projects/). [This introductory
post](https://blog.docker.com/2017/04/introducing-the-moby-project/) talks
about the same in detail.

Another parallel container project is called `rkt`, which implements a whole
different approach to manage containers and developed by CoreOS. It has a
runtime which supports OCI images but as of now, it does not follow exact
`runtime-spec`. Think of `rkt` as an alternative to Docker Engine along with
`containerd` and `runC`. `rkt` also has CRI implementation for using with
Kubernetes, called `rktlet`. Following image captures this comparison along
with other details.

![rkt vs Docker](https://coreos.com/rkt/docs/latest/rkt-vs-docker-process-
model.png)

_Source:<https://coreos.com/rkt/docs/latest/rkt-vs-other-projects.html#rkt-vs-
docker>_

To summarize, `runC` is OCI spec implementation for creating, starting and
deleting containers. `containerd` uses `runC` and provides a broader runtime
for containers. Docker client uses Docker Engine on local systems, which is
built on top of `containerd`. Docker uses Moby Project as upstream which
includes all these components. Kubernetes can use `containerd`, `cri-o` or
`rktlet` as it’s container runtime. `rkt` is an alternative to Docker and has
all components of its own.

[Edit]

Adding about `LXC` and `libcontainer`, they both use kernel features like
namespaces and cgroups to provide the virtualization and have different
motivations. Docker Engine used to use `LXC` before they created their own
`libcontainer`. So, `runC` is mostly just a wrapper around `libcontainer`.

[Reddit discussion
link.](https://www.reddit.com/r/docker/comments/bc4de6/brief_writeup_explaining_confusing_terms_in/)

PS: Thanks [Fakabbir Amin](https://fakabbir.github.io/) for reading the draft
of this post.

