---
title: Best music bands which made bhari impact on the music scene in India 
date: 2019-05-22 
draft: false 
---

Story source:

https://www.innfinity.in/entertainment/best-indian-music-bands/


Music isn’t just food for the soul. It is the passion that fuels us, that
redefines our existence. And rather than mainstream music that calls for glitz
and glamour, what our soul craves is music that satiates the spirit rather
than the senses. Independent music bands in this respect are the ultimate
deities of music aficionados. Here are 13 of the best Indian music bands you
can turn to anytime for an enriching musical experience-

## #1 Parikrama

  
Parikrama has to be one of the most iconic bands that redefined the landscape
of music in India. As one of the prime augmentors of the genre of rock and
roll music in the country, Parikrama has been dealing with melodies and tunes
for almost three decades now.

And Parikrama is as much a delight with its stage performances as it is with
its songs. With indigenous fusion styles that incorporates a variety of
elements ranging from classical to contemporary, Parikrama is undoubtedly the
trendsetter as far as independent music bands in India are concerned, having
earned fame even as it [rejected the name and fame of
Bollywood](https://www.hindustantimes.com/music/parikrama-25-a-rock-band-that-
refused-bollywood-yet-stayed-on-top/story-pvUc7TZ9b6MRQ6xOAJvvLK.html) .

## #2 Euphoria

  
Another of the earliest bands that set to send waves of music across the
country is Euphoria. [Twenty years
since](https://www.news18.com/news/buzz/20-years-of-euphoria-heres-why-the-
band-is-still-significant-in-indias-pop-culture-1903111.html) their debut
album and the band assembled by Dr. Palash Sen remains as euphoric as it had
always been. Only now, it draws on nostalgia as much as it does on music.

Even as Euphoria became synonymous with ushering in a new phase of melodies
into Indian music, they still had their style well rooted in tradition. Fusion
of traditional instruments like the tabla, dholak and sitar with the funkiness
of the electric guitar sure renders Euphoria’s music a touch of unique appeal.

## #3 Papon and the East Indian Company

  
Angaraag Mahanta aka Papon has been synonymous with rendering soulful music,
replete with folk touches and artsy elements. This spirited nature of his
music extends as well to his electronic folk fusion band The East Indian
Company.

The immensely talented, versatile artist from Assam has been blending folk
elements into modern music with finesse and along with his band [Papon and the
East Indian Company](http://www.papon.in/papon.php) has been belting out hits
after hits for years now, setting a benchmark of sorts in Bollywood as well.

## #4 Agnee

  
Indian rock band Agnee’s repertoire has been Indian style stirring music and
with their ample drawings from Hindustani classical and Carnatic music while
embedding elements of pop, rock and funk, the band has carved a niche for
itself in the independent music scene of the country. With their delightful,
hummable music that have been belting out for over a decade now,
[Agnee](http://www.agneelive.com/about.html) has emerged to be one of the most
loved and revered bands across the country.

## #5 The Ganesh Talkies

  
As an indie band that have made their love for mainstream Bollywood culture a
part of their music making culture, [The Ganesh
Talkies](https://www.redbull.com/in-en/band-in-focus-the-ganesh-talkies) is
surprisingly quirky. And while you might not have heard this name associated
with a band per se, the reason why it should make for a count among the best
bands of India is its offbeat music, that is very high on drama.

With a medley of interesting sounds that identify as [the band’s trademark
music](https://www.headphonezone.in/blogs/the-insider/ganesh-talkies-and-how-
they-entertain), fun and energetic, this band encompasses every element of the
City of Joy- Kolkata, from where it originated. Originality and quirkiness
feature prominently among this band’s memorable renditions.

## #6 Pentagram

  
Among those [Indian bands that have streamlined Indian rock music
](https://caravanmagazine.in/reviews-and-essays/heroes-rock-n-roll-
uninterrupted)is the iconic music belter Pentagram. From performing live at
festivals and gigs to claiming fame with award winning performances in a
couple of competitions to now being on an indefinite break, Pentagram has
scaled echelons in the Indian music industry and remains as one of those
iconic pioneers of original and independent music.

## #7 The Vinyl Records

  
[The Vinyl Records is an all girl
band](http://conversationswithbianca.com/2012/08/05/the-vinyl-records/) from
the north eastern region of India that concentrates on churning out music with
strong feminist leanings. With their music exploring genres across indie, post
punk and the sound from new wave eras of 70s and 80s, The Vinyl Records
definitely comes across as one of the more unconventional bands from this part
of the world.  

## #8 The Raghu Dixit Project

Helmed by extraordinary musical talent Raghu Dixit, [The Raghu Dixit
Project](http://www.raghudixit.com/) has to be one of the most celebrated
bands in India and even beyond. The band is particularly known for its
stunning music that has a medley of Indian cultures sewn into it.

  
Exploring music that resounds with its unique tone of Indianness and the
diversity this refreshing inclusivity bestows on its creations, the band is
highly original in its content even though its takes inspiration from
traditions all over.

Soulful, contemporary melodies that are besotted with splashes of the color
that India takes pride in has turned out to be the band’s trademark identity.
The songs also are not like anything you have ever heard before, they sound so
fresh and are so heart warming that it’s difficult not to be pulled into their
unconventional embrace. Indeed as a music band that sounds so energetic and
electrifying yet is as soothing, The Raghu Dixit Project is definitely one of
the most iconic bands of the country.

[Now follow INNFINITY at Flipboard](https://flipboard.com/@INNFINITY)

## #9 Shades of Retribution

  
A death metal band from Assam that employs the local dialect to weave words
into melodies, [Shades of
Retribution](https://vibesnortheast.in/artists/shades-of-retribution/) has an
old school base and relies heavily on local influences. The trials and
turbulations that plague the lives of people in the North eastern part of
India find reflection in the band’s songs and this is perhaps what makes the
band an one of a kind in the entire country.

## #10 Indus Creed

  
The oldest among Indian rock bands having been established way back in 1984,
Indus Creed is also among the most influential of Indian bands. Classic rock
songs dominate the band’s music scene very aptly for a band that had harboured
the beginning of contemporary rock music in the country and [emerged as a true
game changer](https://www.hindustantimes.com/music/changing-the-game-indus-
creed/story-iqs3E8CFIS6I3YjN6JPLRI.html) of sorts.

## #11 Yesterdrive

  
Another band from the North eastern region of India that has a wider and
diversified audience as far as Indie music is concerned,
[Yesterdrive](http://www.gigsync.in/page/yesterdrive) is a rock quartet band
that delivers high energy and higher entertainment.

As a band, Yesterdrive strives to bring back the sounds of the past,
captivating all with their exhilarating performances, catchy music and dynamic
presence. And with their love for their passion fueling the music they create,
it’s only obvious that this just over five years old band is a true treat for
all music lovers across the country.

## #12 Paradigm Shift

  
A progressive rock band that fuses classical Indian music with contemporary
prog elements, [Paradigm
Shift](https://indianbandshub.blogspot.com/2019/01/paradigm-shift-mumbai.html)
has been high on the music radar ever since they emerged on the public domain
more than ten years ago.

Their lyrics are great and their music is refreshing, but what perhaps lend
this relatively new band much of their popularity is their highly commonplace
style of composing melodies. Even with an Indian- western fusion, they choose
to keep it light rather than going too much into the technical complexities.
This is what have stood them in good stead and made them one of the best bands
Indian music has been witness to over the years.

## #13 Sanam

  
When we are talking about iconic bands, it’s almost imperative for us to
include one of the most well known boy bands the country has been home to in
the past years. Sanam, the Indian pop rock band has been a rage for many years
now and continues with the popularity, being [the fastest growing band
digitally](https://www.telegraphindia.com/entertainment/boy-zone-indian-pop-
rock-band-sanam-has-a-huge-youtube-following/cid/1672570).

As a band that concentrated on enchanting, romantic experiences woven in
songs, Sanam became the instant source of veneration for a huge number of
dreamy Indian youth, swaying to their love struck melodies while exploring
love themselves.

Perhaps Sanam’s popularity also has much to do with the 90s vibes they give
off despite being the millennium’s band. And with tags like India’s One
Direction and Fantastic Four, as well as tag alongs of the iconic Backstreet
Boys, Sanam is only mounting more on the popularity.

Even as a later entrant in the Indian music scene, the four boy band has
emerged to be one of the most loved. Particularly for its efficient
exploration of the digital space, Sanam has grown to be one of the most
iconically popular Indian bands in recent years. Even worldwide, Sanam is
going big- having [composed the original
track](https://www.news18.com/news/india/the-amazing-spider-man-2s-hindi-
anthem-a-song-composed-in-just-one-night-683745.html) for the Hollywood movie
The Amazing Spiderman 2.

