---
title: "A Circle in the Darkness: Post-War Europe" 
date: 2020-05-18 
draft: false 
---

Story source:

https://consortiumnews.com/2020/05/17/a-circle-in-the-darkness-post-war-europe/


**Diana Johnstone’s newly-published memoir offers an incisive, gritty,
politically alert, and expansive account of post-war Europe, reports Patrick
Lawrence in this interview with the author.**  

[![](https://consortiumnews.com/wp-
content/uploads/2020/05/DianaJohnstone2-bw.jpg)](https://consortiumnews.com/wp-
content/uploads/2020/05/DianaJohnstone2-bw.jpg)

[**By Patrick Lawrence**](https://consortiumnews.com/tag/patrick-lawrence/) **  
**_Special to Consortium News_

**[![](https://consortiumnews.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/08/Patrick-S-
freeport-12-2012-Color-No-3-130x130.jpg)](https://consortiumnews.com/wp-
content/uploads/2018/08/Patrick-S-freeport-12-2012-Color-No-3.jpg)D** iana
Johnstone first sojourned in Paris during the early postwar years, as France
and the rest of Europe were coming back to life—and as America set out to
build an empire amid the Cold War frenzies of the McCarthy years.

Nearly seven decades later, Johnstone’s place among the distinguished Europe
correspondents of our time lies beyond dispute. A Minnesota native, she is a
French _citoyen_ now and remains a _Parisienne_. “If I must claim a label,”
Johnstone, 89, writes in her just-published personal and political memoir, “it
would be that of an independent truth-seeker.”

_[Circle in the Darkness](https://www.amazon.com/Circle-Darkness-Memoir-World-
Watcher-
ebook/dp/B0849SRZTZ/ref=sr_1_1?dchild=1&keywords=Circle+in+the+Darkness&qid=1589653039&sr=8-1)
_(Clarity Press) __ —Johnstone takes the title from Einstein—is a moving,
incisive, gritty, politically alert, and always humane account of Johnstone’s
long[![](https://consortiumnews.com/wp-
content/uploads/2020/05/Circle.jpg)](https://consortiumnews.com/wp-
content/uploads/2020/05/Circle.jpg) decades as a Europeanist. In the interview
that follows, we touched on many of the topics she has long covered in her
news reports, commentaries, and books: the trans–Atlantic rift, the fate of
the European Union, Europe’s search for an independent voice and the
Continent’s relations with Russia. She told me: “I think there is increasing
desire to escape from the clutches of the American empire, but what is needed
is the right moment and leaders capable of seizing it.”

I conducted this interview via email over the course of several months, during
which the spread of the Covid–19 virus confined Johnstone to her Paris
apartment. Per usual, she had a take on the political ramifications of this
global calamity. “The Covid–19 crisis makes it just that much clearer that the
European Union is no more than a complex economic arrangement,” Johnstone said
toward the end of our exchange, “with neither the sentiment nor the popular
leaders that hold together a nation.”

**P.L.** **You’ve known France and Europe through all sorts of phases—postwar
reconstruction, the so-called** _ **trente glorieuses**_ **[1945–75], the ’68
“events” and their aftermath, the drift away from a native social democracy
toward Anglo–American neoliberalism. How would you describe this arc? What has
propelled Europe in the direction it has taken—which, maybe you agree, is an
unfortunate trajectory? I suppose I’m looking for historical context and
causality.**

**D.J.** That’s a very big question, which is hard for me to answer without
going on and on. I suppose you could describe this arc in terms of the
Americanization of France, which has risen over the decades and may be
declining mainly because America’s attractiveness as a model is declining, not
only in France.

**Shall we look at the history?**

[![](https://consortiumnews.com/wp-
content/uploads/2020/05/Guarding_subway_entrance_Paris_LOC-
scaled.jpg)](https://consortiumnews.com/wp-
content/uploads/2020/05/Guarding_subway_entrance_Paris_LOC-scaled.jpg)

French soldiers guarding a Metro entrance in Paris, France at the beginning of
World War I.(Bain News Service/Wikimedia Commons)

You have to go back to the First World War to understand the process. The war
of 1914 to 1918 bled the youth of the nation—over half the armed men were
casualties, with heavy losses among the young officers. France came out of
that horrendous bloodbath among the victors, got back Alsace–Lorraine, and was
exhausted, more than willing to consider that one “war to end all wars” was
enough. Germany was also bled but came out bitterly resentful, with the
results we all know: a second war meant to correct the first. What I’m getting
at is that the French reluctance to fight another war with Germany cannot be
explained—as some do—by latent sympathy for Nazi ideas, although such sympathy
existed throughout Europe at the time—more so, surely, in Britain. It’s simply
that in France, the feeling of being eager to die for a righteous cause had
been used up 20 years earlier.

France’s rapid surrender to the German blitz in 1940 was a trauma whose scars
have never been healed. The role of “the Resistance,” with a capital “R,” was
mainly to salvage what could be salvaged of national pride. It also prepared
for the social democracy of the postwar period, with the program of the
_Conseil National de la Résistance_ (CNR, National Resistance Council),
accepted across the political spectrum as necessary for national unity. It
called for universal social security, nationalization of banks and key
industries, women’s suffrage—finally!—and other social measures.

**Interesting. These connections are not much appreciated in the U.S. How does
your own experience fit with this history, “an American in
Paris”?**[![](https://consortiumnews.com/wp-
content/uploads/2020/05/Eiffel.jpeg)](https://consortiumnews.com/wp-
content/uploads/2020/05/Eiffel.jpeg)

I first made acquaintance with Paris in the mid–1950s. It was not in ruins
like Germany or damp and dreary as London, but my impression was that morale
was not high. You could feel an underlying resistance to America’s whopping
shadow, in some ways a continuation of the passive resistance to Nazi
occupation, as most resistance is always passive. The more tangible resistance
came from more or less the same players as the Resistance against Nazi
occupation: the French Communist Party and conservative patriots.

In Eastern Europe, the new Russian occupation was military and political. In
France, the American occupation was only slightly military but primarily
cultural. Its beginnings showed the happy face of American jazz. You could
even be a bit anti–American and love jazz thanks to the black musicians.

And jazz by no means drove out the internationally popular French singers who
provided part of the background music of the era: Georges Brassens, Edith
Piaf, Juliette Greco, Charles Trenet, Yves Montand, many more. Although
vaguely demoralized, Paris still aspired to the role of vanguard of
intellectual life, thanks to “existentialism”—not only the worldwide prestige
of Jean–Paul Sartre and Simone de Beauvoir, but a lifestyle appropriate to
recovering from a bad illness.

[![](https://consortiumnews.com/wp-
content/uploads/2020/05/vitrier-327x500.jpeg)](https://consortiumnews.com/wp-
content/uploads/2020/05/vitrier.jpeg)In those days you could open your window
to street singers and throw them a little money. And there were the men who
walked through the city with sheets of glass on their backs crying _“Vitrier!
Vitrier!”_ [Glazier! Glazier!] on the chance that your windowpane was broken
and you needed to have it fixed.

And there were the movies, black-and-white but never Manichean. Without
putting the word on it, that was what first won me over: the absence of the
emphatic moral dualism of American movies. Cocteau’s _La Belle et la Bête_ ,
the wistful amoralism of young Gérard Philippe in _Le diable au corps_ —no
actor was showing off how good he was, and there was no one to hate.

Meanwhile in the ’50s, France was losing colonial wars in Indochina and North
Africa, and its politics were like the game of pick-up-sticks.

In 1958, de Gaulle took over, going on to end both American military
occupation and French colonialism, choosing to seek independent relations with
the whole world. Culture Minister André Malraux returned the blackened façades
of Paris buildings to their original cream color, industry flourished, French
“New Wave” cinema excelled.

**Thank you. Wonderful context. Let’s keep going into the ’60s.**

[![](https://consortiumnews.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/Paris-1968-big-
scaled.jpg)](https://consortiumnews.com/wp-
content/uploads/2020/05/Paris-1968-big-scaled.jpg)

Paris 1968, Claude Raimond-Dityvon. (Stedelijik Museum Amsterdam 5)

The paradox of the ’60s was that just as de Gaulle was de–Americanizing France
on the geopolitical level, the totally baby-boom postwar generation was
Americanizing in its own peculiar way. As the country prospered, a squeaky-
clean new generation clumsily Americanized with the “ _YéYé_ ” singers,
“surprise parties,” “flirts”, and “standing” (instead of the good French word
_prestige_ ).

The celebrations of Israel’s victory in the 1967 Six Day War were closely
followed by a fresh focus on the crimes of the Occupation, notably the
deportation of Jews. This plunged the nation into guilt—a guilt the young
generation avoided by dissociating from the nation.

**You’re talking about that period when the export of American culture was
turned into a Cold War weapon.**

[![](https://consortiumnews.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/Paris-68-big-
scaled.jpg)](https://consortiumnews.com/wp-
content/uploads/2020/05/Paris-68-big-scaled.jpg)

Paris 1968, Claude Raimond-Dityvon (Stedelijik Museum Amsterdam)

America was innocent. The fascination with a mythical America, spread
worldwide by the U.S. entertainment industry, often with government
sponsorship, still prepares people to despise their own country as backward.
This sets the stage for fatalistic acceptance of U.S. pressure to conform to
the U.S. concept of American exceptionalism even in world affairs. This was
only temporarily set back by the war in Vietnam—the Americans themselves were
against the war, weren’t they? I was one of those who helped make it seem that
way.

**_Please_** **
__**[**_Donate_**](https://org.salsalabs.com/o/1868/p/salsa/donation/common/public/?donate_page_KEY=14124&okay=True)
**_to_ CNs _’ 25th  
Anniversary Spring Fund Drive_**

The May ’68 generation, which had grown up as things got steadily better,
rejected both the authority of Gaullist paternalism and the discipline of the
Communists. The result was a hedonistic individualism, intellectualized by
Foucault [Michel Foucault, the late philosopher and theorist] and others as
“resistance” to ubiquitous “power.” In this respect, by its “theorists,”
French philosophy actually hastened the Americanization of France, and even of
America itself. By constantly attacking, deconstructing, and denouncing every
remnant of human “power” they could spot, the intellectual rebels left the
power of “the markets” unimpeded, and did nothing to stand in the way of the
expansion of U.S. military power all around the world.

The “anti-power” generation ended up condemning its own country, France, for
its colonial past, while showing scant concern over the overwhelming current
power of the United States as it destroys one country after another—sometimes
with France taking part, as in Libya. There is also the fact, hard to
demonstrate in detail, that through networks like the Young Leaders program of
the French–American Foundation, United States officials get a crack at
indoctrinating, selecting, or at least vetting up-and-coming French political
personalities.

**So well explained, Diana. And we come to the neoliberal phase, which has
always struck me as odd, given it derived from the Anglo–American tradition,
not the Continent’s.**

[![Macron: Outlawing opposition. \(President of
Russia\)](https://consortiumnews.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/MACRON-
President-of-Russia--e1551880600841.jpg)](https://consortiumnews.com/wp-
content/uploads/2019/03/MACRON-President-of-Russia--e1551880600841.jpg)

Macron.

With Emmanuel Macron, France seems to have the anti–de Gaulle, the most
American president ever. And that may help trigger a change of course. Donald
Trump is also, in his way, the most “American” president in recent times, in
ways that do not appeal to people in Europe. The United States looks more and
more like a madhouse, and its foreign policy threatens the interests and even
survival of Europe, so the time has come for the arc to descend.

**At what point and why did Europe surrender its independence within the
Atlantic alliance—or did it never, during the early postwar years, achieve any
independence to speak of?**

The whole point of the Atlantic alliance was to institutionalize Western
Europe’s surrender of its independence. And that was decided at Yalta—where
Western Europe was not represented, not even by France, to the great chagrin
of de Gaulle. There was an attempt at independence in the decade of President
de Gaulle. But this bold course did not gain overwhelming domestic support.
The only other independent European leader was Olof Palme [Swedish prime
minister, 1969–76; 1982 until his assassination in 1986], but Sweden was not
part of the Atlantic alliance and Palme’s relative neutrality was always
heartily disliked by most of the Swedish upper classes and military leaders.

**Can you reflect upon de Gaulle in this context? He is not much understood
among Americans—not for his insistence on French independence and certainly
not for his economic and industrial policies—his conception of society
altogether. Can you say a little about this, and de Gaulle’s idea of French,
and by extension European independence? Should we think of his domestic
program as of a piece with his thoughts on the international side?**

[![](https://consortiumnews.com/wp-
content/uploads/2020/05/Commander_of_Free_French_Forces_General_Charles_de_Gaulle_seated_at_his_desk_in_London_during_the_Second_World_War._D1973.jpg)](https://consortiumnews.com/wp-
content/uploads/2020/05/Commander_of_Free_French_Forces_General_Charles_de_Gaulle_seated_at_his_desk_in_London_during_the_Second_World_War._D1973.jpg)

De Gaulle, London, 1940. (British Ministry of Information Photo Division
Photographer)

Not much understood? I’d say he has been totally and willfully misunderstood.
There are relatively few Americans who can begin to understand a leader
determined to maintain his country’s independence from America, and those few
have generally had to live abroad to get the point. De Gaulle was a
conservative, not a free-market liberal, who saw social reforms benefiting the
working class as necessary for national coherence. The mixed economy he
favored is not altogether unlike “socialism with Chinese characteristics”—a
strong state role to encourage rapid industrial growth, with the rest left to
free enterprise. It was a most successful formula. Of course, the political
system was quite different.

Having a sense of history, de Gaulle saw that colonialism had been a moment in
history that was past. His policy was to foster friendly relations on equal
terms with all parts of the world, regardless of ideological differences. I
think that Putin’s concept of a multipolar world is similar. It is clearly a
concept that horrifies the exceptionalists.

De Gaulle had an organic concept of the nation, a living thing that develops
its own identity, and in this view each nation needs to be able to live its
own life. This is a conservative, not an aggressive nationalism. The United
States is an ideological nation, whose “values” and institutions should be
welcomed or imposed everywhere. France has tried that, with Napoleon
Bonaparte. The retreat from Moscow [ending Bonaparte’s Russian campaign in
1812] is a lesson to be learned in Washington.

**Is there any Gaullist streak in French or European discourse today? He
certainly left his mark elsewhere—there is a self-consciously Gaullist strain
in Japanese thinking, for instance—often submerged but ever there, the impulse
to break free of the suffocating embrace, let’s call it. Any such thing in
France or elsewhere in Europe today?**

[![](https://consortiumnews.com/wp-
content/uploads/2020/05/President_Kennedy_and_President_De_Gaulle_at_the_conclusion_of_their_talks_at_Elysee_Palace_Paris_France.jpg)](https://consortiumnews.com/wp-
content/uploads/2020/05/President_Kennedy_and_President_De_Gaulle_at_the_conclusion_of_their_talks_at_Elysee_Palace_Paris_France.jpg)

President Kennedy and President De Gaulle at the conclusion of their talks at
Elysee Palace, Paris, France, June 2, 1961. (John Fitzgerald Kennedy Library,
Boston)

Fifty years after his death, just about everyone in France claims to be
“Gaullist.” They certainly aren’t, but this indicates that there is deep
dissatisfaction with the way things are going. I think there is increasing
desire to escape from the clutches of the American empire, but what is needed
is the right moment and leaders capable of seizing it.

**Do you think “the right moment” is upon us or approaching? There are
certainly signs of it—all the dissatisfaction Trump has provoked, the
extraordinary “declarations of independence” that followed the disastrous NATO
and G–7 summits in 2017. What is your reading of “the moment”?**

Amazing. Just as you were asking about the big moment, here comes a big moment
that is not what any of us were expecting. This sudden disruption of our lives
by a virus is a reminder that the future is always unknown and predictions are
vain.

The dissatisfactions that were building up before the pandemic hit are all
there, many of them exacerbated by the health crisis—but also overshadowed by
the new problems it creates. During months of Yellow Vest protests and strikes
against government austerity measures, nurses were in the forefront, braving
violent repression to protest against their deteriorating working conditions.
The Covid–19 crisis has shown just how right they were! They are now popularly
regarded as heroes.

**So long as we’re on the subject, what has been the general response to
officially ordered confinements during the Covid–19 crisis? Over here we’re
seeing mounting protests against them—people demanding that restrictions
ease.**

[![](https://consortiumnews.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/Coronavirus-
Civilization-jl.jpg)](https://consortiumnews.com/wp-
content/uploads/2020/04/Coronavirus-Civilization-jl.jpg)

On a wall in Paris: “You will not confine our anger.”

In France, confinement has been generally well accepted as necessary, but that
does not mean people are content with the government—on the contrary. Every
evening at eight, people go to their windows to cheer for health workers and
others doing essential tasks, but the applause is not for President Macron.

Macron and his government are criticized for hesitating too long to confine
the population, for vacillating about the need for masks and tests, or about
when or how much to end the confinement. Their confusion and indecision at
least defend them from the wild accusation of having staged the whole thing in
order to lock up the population.

What we have witnessed is the failure of what used to be one of the very best

public health services in the world. It has been degraded by years of cost-
cutting. In recent years, the number of hospital beds per capita has declined
steadily. Many hospitals have been shut down and those that remain are
drastically understaffed. Public hospital facilities have been reduced to a
state of perpetual saturation, so that when a new epidemic comes along, on top
of all the other usual illnesses, there is simply not the capacity to deal
with it all at once.

The neoliberal globalization myth fostered the delusion that advanced Western
societies could prosper from their superior brains, thanks to ideas and
computer startups, while the dirty work of actually making things is left to
low-wage countries. One result: a drastic shortage of face masks. The
government let a factory that produced masks and other surgical equipment be
sold off and shut down. Having outsourced its textile industry, France had no
immediate way to produce the masks it needed.

Meanwhile, in early April, Vietnam donated hundreds of thousands of
antimicrobial face masks to European countries and is producing them by the
million. Employing tests and selective isolation, Vietnam has fought off the
epidemic with only a few hundred cases and no
deaths.[![](https://consortiumnews.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/French-
hospitals.jpg)](https://consortiumnews.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/French-
hospitals.jpg)

**You must have thoughts as to the question of Western unity in response to
Covid–19.**

In late March, French media reported that a large stock of masks ordered and
paid for by the southeastern region of France was virtually hijacked on the
tarmac of a Chinese airport by Americans, who tripled the price and had the
cargo flown to the United States. There are also reports of Polish and Czech
airport authorities intercepting Chinese or Russian shipments of masks
intended for hard-hit Italy and keeping them for their own use.

The absence of European solidarity has been shockingly clear. Better-equipped
Germany banned exports of masks to Italy. In the depth of its crisis, Italy
found that the German and Dutch governments were mainly concerned with making
sure Italy pays its debts. Meanwhile, a team of Chinese experts arrived in
Rome to help Italy with its Covid–19 crisis, displaying a banner reading “We
are waves of the same sea, leaves of the same tree, flowers of the same
garden.” The European institutions lack such humanistic poetry. Their founding
value is not solidarity but the neoliberal principle of “free unimpeded
competition.”

**How do you think this reflects on the European Union?**

[![](https://consortiumnews.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/EU-
Flags.jpg)](https://consortiumnews.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/EU-
Flags.jpg)

Member states flags outside European Parliament, Strasbourg. (© European Union
2017 – European Parliament)

The Covid–19 crisis makes it just that much clearer that the European Union is
no more than a complex economic arrangement, with neither the sentiment nor
the popular leaders that hold together a nation. For a generation, schools,
media, politicians have instilled the belief that the “nation” is an obsolete
entity. But in a crisis, people find that they are in France, or Germany, or
Italy, or Belgium—but not in “Europe.” The European Union is structured to
care about trade, investment, competition, debt, economic growth. Public
health is merely an economic indicator. For decades, the European Commission
has put irresistible pressure on nations to reduce the costs of their public
health facilities in order to open competition for contracts to the private
sector—which is international by nature.

Globalization has hastened the spread of the pandemic, but it has not
strengthened internationalist solidarity. Initial gratitude for Chinese aid is
being brutally opposed by European Atlanticists. In early May, Mathias
Döpfner, CEO of the Springer publishing giant, bluntly called on Germany to
ally with the U.S.—against China. Scapegoating China may seem the way to try
to hold the declining Western world together, even as Europeans’ long-standing
admiration for America turns to dismay.

Meanwhile, relations between EU member states have never been worse. In Italy
and to a greater extent in France, the coronavirus crisis has enforced growing
disillusion with the European Union and an ill-defined desire to restore
national sovereignty.

**Corollary question: What are the prospects that Europe will produce**
**leaders capable of seizing that right moment, that assertion of**
**independence? What do you reckon such leaders would be like?**

The EU is likely to be a central issue in the near future, but this issue can
be exploited in very different ways, depending on which leaders get hold of
it. The coronavirus crisis has intensified the centrifugal forces already
undermining the European Union. The countries that have suffered most from the
epidemic are among the most indebted of the EU member states, starting with
Italy. The economic damage from the lockdown obliges them to borrow further.
As their debt increases, so do interest rates charged by commercial banks.
They turned to the EU for help, for instance by issuing eurobonds that would
share the debt at lower interest rates. This has increased tension between
debtor countries in the south and creditor countries in the north, which said
_nein_. Countries in the eurozone cannot borrow from the European Central Bank
as the U.S. Treasury borrows from the Fed. And their own national central
banks take orders from the ECB, which controls the euro.

**What does the crisis mean for the euro? I confess I’ve lost faith in this**
**project, given how disadvantaged it leaves the nations on the Continent’s**
**southern rim.**

[![](https://consortiumnews.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/euro-central-
bank.jpeg)](https://consortiumnews.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/euro-
central-bank.jpeg)

European Central Bank building, Frankfurt. (Pikrepo)

The great irony is that “a common currency” was conceived by its sponsors as
the key to European unity. On the contrary, the euro has a polarizing
effect—with Greece at the bottom and Germany at the top. And Italy sinking.
But Italy is much bigger than Greece and won’t go quietly.

The German constitutional court in Karlsruhe recently issued a long judgment
making it clear who is boss. It recalled and insisted that Germany agreed to
the euro only on the grounds that the main mission of the European Central
Bank was to fight inflation, and that it could not directly finance member
states. If these rules were not followed, the Bundesbank, the German central
bank, would be obliged to pull out of the ECB. And since the Bundesbank is the
ECB’s main creditor, that is that. There can be no generous financial help to
troubled governments within the eurozone. Period.

**Is there a possibility of disintegration here?**

[![](https://consortiumnews.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/Yellow-Vests-
scaled.jpg)](https://consortiumnews.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/Yellow-
Vests-scaled.jpg)

Yellow Vests protest, March 7, 2020 in Paris before lockdown. (Joe Lauria)

The idea of leaving the EU is most developed in France. The Union Populaire
Républicaine, founded in 2007 by former senior functionary François
Asselineau, calls for France to leave the euro, the European Union, and NATO.

The party has been a didactic success, spreading its ideas and attracting
around 20,000 active militants without scoring any electoral success. A main
argument for leaving the EU is to escape from the constraints of EU
competition rules in order to protect its vital industry, agriculture, and
above all its public services.

A major paradox is that the left and the Yellow Vests call for economic and
social policies that are impossible under EU rules, and yet many on the left
shy away from even thinking of leaving the EU. For over a generation, the
French left has made an imaginary “social Europe” the center of its utopian
ambitions.

“ **Europe” as an idea or an ideal, you mean.**

Decades of indoctrination in the ideology of “Europe” has instilled the belief
that the nation-state is a bad thing of the past. The result is that people
raised in the European Union faith tend to regard any suggestion of return to
national sovereignty as a fatal step toward fascism. This fear of contagion
from “the right” is an obstacle to clear analysis which weakens the left… and
favors the right, which dares be patriotic.

Two and a half months of coronavirus crisis have brought to light a factor
that makes any predictions about future leaders even more problematic. That
factor is a widespread distrust and rejection of all established authority.
This makes rational political programs extremely difficult, because rejection
of one authority implies acceptance of another. For instance, the way to
liberate public services and pharmaceuticals from the distortions of the
profit motive is nationalization. If you distrust the power of one as much as
the other, there is nowhere to go.

Such radical distrust can be explained by two main factors—the inevitable
feeling of helplessness in our technologically advanced world, combined with
the deliberate and even transparent lies on the part of mainstream politicians
and media. But it sets the stage for the emergence of manipulated saviors or
opportunistic charlatans every bit as deceptive as the leaders we already
have, or even more so. I hope these irrational tendencies are less pronounced
in France than in some other countries.

**I’m eager to talk about Russia. There are signs that relations with Russia**
**are another source of European dissatisfaction as “junior partners” within**
**the U.S.–led Atlantic alliance. Macron is outspoken on this point, “junior**
**partners” being his phrase. The Germans—business people, some senior**
**officials in government—are quite plainly restive.**

[![](https://consortiumnews.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/M-and-
Putin.jpg)](https://consortiumnews.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/M-and-
Putin.jpg)

Putin at the Elysee Palace for Normandy summit with Macron. Dec. 9, 2019.
(President of Russia)

Russia is a living part of European history and culture. Its exclusion is
totally unnatural and artificial. Brzezinski [the late Zbigniew Brzezinski,
the Carter administration’s national security adviser] spelled it out in _The
Great Chessboard_ : The U.S. maintains world hegemony by keeping the Eurasian
landmass divided. But this policy can be seen to be inherited from the
British. It was Churchill who proclaimed—in fact welcomed—the Iron Curtain
that kept continental Europe divided. In retrospect, the Cold War was
basically part of the divide-and-rule strategy, since it persists with greater
intensity than ever after its ostensible cause—the Communist threat—is long
gone.

**I hadn’t put our current circumstance in this context.**

[![](https://consortiumnews.com/wp-
content/uploads/2020/05/Euromaidan_in_Kiev_2014-02-19_12-06-2-scaled.jpg)](https://consortiumnews.com/wp-
content/uploads/2020/05/Euromaidan_in_Kiev_2014-02-19_12-06-2-scaled.jpg)

US-backed, violent coup in Ukraine, 2014. (Wikipedia)

The whole Ukrainian operation of 2014 [the U.S.–cultivated coup in Kyiv,
February 2014] was lavishly financed and stimulated by the United States in
order to create a new conflict with Russia. Joe Biden has been the Deep
State’s main front man in turning Ukraine into an American satellite, used as
a battering ram to weaken Russia and destroy its natural trade and cultural
relations with Western Europe.

U.S. sanctions are particularly contrary to German business interests, and
NATO’s aggressive gestures put Germany on the front lines of an eventual war.

But Germany has been an occupied country—militarily and politically—for 75
years, and I suspect that many German political leaders (usually vetted by
Washington) have learned to fit their projects into U.S. policies. I think
that under the cover of Atlantic loyalty, there are some frustrated
imperialists lurking in the German establishment, who think they can use
Washington’s Russophobia as an instrument to make a comeback as a world
military power.

But I also think that the political debate in Germany is overwhelmingly
hypocritical, with concrete aims veiled by fake issues such as human rights
and, of course, devotion to Israel.

We should remember that the U.S. does not merely use its allies—its allies, or
rather their leaders, figure they are using the U.S. for some purposes of
their own.

**What about what the French have been saying since the G–7 session in**
**Biarritz two years ago, that Europe should forge its own relations with**
**Russia according to Europe’s interests, not America’s?**

[![](https://consortiumnews.com/wp-
content/uploads/2020/05/G7Biarritz_48632273398.jpg)](https://consortiumnews.com/wp-
content/uploads/2020/05/G7Biarritz_48632273398.jpg)

At G7 Summit in Biarritz, France, Aug. 26, 2019. (White House)

I think France is likelier than Germany to break with the U.S.–imposed
Russophobia simply because, thanks to de Gaulle, France is not quite as
thoroughly under U.S. occupation. Moreover, friendship with Russia is a
traditional French balance against German domination—which is currently being
felt and resented.

**Stepping back for a broader look, do you think Europe’s position on the**
**western flank of the Eurasian landmass will inevitably shape its position**
**with regard not only to Russia but also China? To put this another way, is**
**Europe destined to become an independent pole of power in the course of**
**this century, standing between West and East?**

At present, what we have standing between West and East is not Europe but
Russia, and what matters is which way Russia leans. Including Russia, Europe
might become an independent pole of power. The U.S. is currently doing
everything to prevent this. But there is a school of strategic thought in
Washington which considers this a mistake, because it pushes Russia into the
arms of China. This school is in the ascendant with the campaign to denounce
China as responsible for the pandemic. As mentioned, the Atlanticists in
Europe are leaping into the anti–China propaganda battle. But they are not
displaying any particular affection for Russia, which shows no sign of
sacrificing its partnership with China for the unreliable Europeans.

If Russia were allowed to become a friendly bridge between China and Europe,
the U.S. would be obliged to abandon its pretensions of world hegemony. But we
are far from that peaceful prospect.

**Patrick Lawrence, a correspondent abroad for many years, chiefly for the**
****_**International Herald Tribune**_ **, is a columnist, essayist, author
and lecturer. His most recent book is “Time No Longer: Americans After the
American Century” (Yale). Follow him on Twitter**[
**@thefloutist**](https://twitter.com/thefloutist) **.** **His web site is**[
**Patrick Lawrence**](http://www.patricklawrence.us/) **. Support his work
via**[ **his Patreon site**](http://www.patreon.com/thefloutist) **.** ****

**_Please_** **
__**[**_Donate_**](https://org.salsalabs.com/o/1868/p/salsa/donation/common/public/?donate_page_KEY=14124&okay=True)
**_to_ CNs _’ 25th  
Anniversary Spring Fund Drive_**

