---
title: "Disney Plus will launch November for $6.99" 
date: 2019-05-23 
draft: false 
---

Story source:

https://www.polygon.com/2019/4/11/17461766/disney-plus-price-release-date-shows-marvel-star-wars-pixar


In the age of exclusive streaming services like HBO GO and CBS All Access
sitting amongst streaming giants like Netflix or Hulu, it’s no surprise that
the Walt Disney Company is putting together a streaming service of its own.
Disney Plus will draw upon the brand’s vast reservoir of content, and finally,
we know when it will launch: November 12, 2019.

Disney Plus is being priced very aggressively — $6.99 per month, or an annual
upfront cost of $69.99 (which averages to about $5.83 per month). For
comparison, [Netflix’s monthly
prices](https://www.polygon.com/2019/1/15/18183611/netflix-subscription-price-
increase) now range from $8.99 to $15.99 (for 4K). Disney Plus’ platform
availability is equally aggressive and includes Apple TV, Roku, Xbox One,
PlayStation 4, Nintendo Switch, Chromecast, smart TVs, desktop, and mobile.

![](https://cdn.vox-
cdn.com/thumbor/Gt7-Kgz4mPtYpULkR436IzcvlGE=/0x0:1066x589/1200x0/filters:focal\(0x0:1066x589\):no_upscale\(\)/cdn.vox-
cdn.com/uploads/chorus_asset/file/16026460/disney_plus_platforms.jpg) The
platforms Disney Plus will be available on Disney

The streaming service will launch domestically and eventually expand overseas,
and will feature a slate of programming that is consistent with the Disney
brand. The service will exclude R-rated movies, which will be relegated to
Hulu (of which, after its purchase of 21st Century Fox, Disney is a major
shareholder). Within the first year of the streaming service, Disney hopes to
produce five original films and five original TV series exclusive to the
streaming service.

Disney is very bullish on its audience outreach, anticipating 60-90 million
subscribers by 2024, with two-thirds of that being international.

## **What will be on Disney Plus: New content from Marvel, Pixar, Star Wars,
Simpsons, and more**

Live-action spin-off series of various Disney properties are already confirmed
to stream exclusively on Disney Plus. At launch this will include Star Wars
series [_The Mandalorian_](https://www.polygon.com/2018/10/15/17979318/the-
mandalorian-live-action-star-wars-series-lore), a limited series about [Falcon
and the Winter Soldier](https://www.polygon.com/2018/10/30/18045536/winter-
soldier-falcon-tv-series-marvel-disney-streaming); series based on _High
School Musical;_ and a live-action remake of _The Lady and the Tramp_ with
voices by Tessa Thompson and Justin Theroux.

Disney Plus will also boast exclusive feature films focused on “holiday
comedies, kid-centered capers, and true-life adventures,” such as _Noelle_ , a
holiday comedy starring Anna Kendrick, and _Stargirl_ , based on the hit YA
novel of the same name.

Also coming within the year are a [Cassian Andor solo spin-
off](https://www.polygon.com/2018/11/8/18076924/star-wars-rogue-one-spinoff-
series-disney-streaming); one more season of the animated [_Star Wars: The
Clone Wars_](https://www.polygon.com/2018/7/19/17593056/star-wars-the-clone-
wars-new-ending-season-sdcc-2018); a limited series about
[Loki,](https://www.polygon.com/2018/10/30/18045536/winter-soldier-falcon-tv-
series-marvel-disney-streaming) and Scarlet Witch and Vision (it’s called
_WandaVision_ — no, really).

Marvel Studios’ Disney Plus content is notable for being (mostly) canonical.
“A post- _Endgame_ MCU will be extremely different, and extremely focused on
Disney Plus tying into our future movies,” said Marvel president Kevin Feige.
That applies, presumably, to _Loki_ , _WandaVision_ , and the Falcon/Winter
Soldier show — and not to _What If?_ , a series that tells alternate stories
from the MCU, just like [the Marvel Comics series of the same
name](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/What_If_\(comics\)).

[Disney Plus will host the entire Disney and Pixar motion picture
library](https://www.polygon.com/2019/3/7/18254862/disney-plus-streaming-
disney-vault-movies) within the year, as well as all the Pixar shorts. A new
Pixar series called _Forky Asks Some Questions_ will be available the day it
launches. There will be 5000 episodes of Disney Channel Shows and over 100
Disney Channel Original Movies — including an all-new _Phineas and Ferb_
original movie called _Cadence Across the Universe._ Also included in the
bundle [is the entire _Simpsons_ back
catalog.](https://www.polygon.com/2019/4/11/18307081/disney-plus-simpsons-
episodes-exclusive)

Some live-action movies like _Pirates of the Caribbean_ and _Alice in
Wonderland_ will also be available at launch, with a slate of over 40 live-
action movies rolling out within the first year.

![](https://cdn.vox-
cdn.com/thumbor/tDCA_ADefGTPFHEm0m_M5V2eneQ=/0x0:1902x1068/1200x0/filters:focal\(0x0:1902x1068\):no_upscale\(\)/cdn.vox-
cdn.com/uploads/chorus_asset/file/16026677/Screen_Shot_2019_04_11_at_7.25.37_PM.png)
Disney

The first two Star Wars trilogies, as well as _Rogue One_ and _The Force
Awakens_ will be available at launch, with _The Last Jedi_ and _Solo_ coming
later. Additionally, National Geographic (yes, Disney owns them) series and
documentaries will be available, including new series called _The World
According to Jeff Goldblum_ and _Magic of the Animal Kingdom_. Meanwhile, the
current plan entails keeping the Marvel films where they are now, meaning that
Netflix gets to retain them for the time being.

The service will be subscription-based and ad-free. It will be available on a
wide variety of platforms, from mobile and tablet to television and computer,
and even some game consoles. Following its US debut, Disney Plus will rapidly
expand globally, with plans to be in nearly all major regions of the world
within the next two years.

Although the full scope of this new service isn’t fully known, one thing is
clear — the Disney home video magic is now consolidated in one, concentrated
location.

