---
title: "How to Install PostgreSQL on Ubuntu, Linux and Mac" 
date: 2020-05-10 
draft: false 
---

Story source:

https://medium.com/@Josylad/how-to-install-postgresql-on-ubuntu-linux-mac-5e08b09b3fb9


# How to Install PostgreSQL on Ubuntu, Linux & Mac

So, recently I had to reinstall my OS and I found myself struggling with
setting up my development environment which includes PostgreSQL on the new
installation and as you might have known, I work a lot with PostgreSQL and I
had to install it before I could do anything.

fortunately, I was able to set up everything **perfectly** and get my Django
projects running within a short time.

SQL Databases like PostgreSQL store data in tables which are different items
in an application. Tables have a fixed number of columns and a variable number
of rows.

Below is a quick guide that should help anyone running on a Linux to get their
PostgreSQL installation working with no hassles.

 **Please follow the steps carefully in order to avoid any error!**

# Installation

## 1\. Ubuntu

To Install Postgres on Ubuntu we need to run the following commands in our
terminal.

    
    
    $ sudo apt-get update

To install Postgres

    
    
    $ sudo apt-get install postgresql postgresql-contrib libpq-dev

Enter **y** when prompted “Do you want to continue? **[Y/n]** ” and wait as
the installation completes.

## Defining a user role

Postgres uses “roles” to aid in authentication and authorization. By default,
Postgres creates a Postgres user and is the only user who can connect to the
server.

We want to create our own superuser role to connect to the server.

For those running on elementary or parrot, run the following command first;

    
    
    $ sudo service postgresql start$ sudo -u postgres createuser --superuser $USER

Enter your desired password when prompted.

We then have to create a database with that `$USER` login name, this is what
Postgres expects as default.

    
    
    $ sudo -u postgres createdb $USER

Navigate to your home directory and enter the following command to create the
.psql_history in order to save your history:

    
    
    $ touch .psql_history

You can now connect to the Postgres server by typing :

    
    
    $ psql

