---
title: "‘Mad Max: Fury Road’: The Oral History of a Modern Action Classic" 
date: 2020-05-12 
draft: false 
---

Story source:

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/12/movies/mad-max-fury-road-oral-history.html


The characters were intriguing, the stunts were exhilarating, and every frame
was bursting with incredible, how’d-they-do-that nerve. “[Mad Max: Fury
Road](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hEJnMQG9ev8)” set a new high-water mark
for action filmmaking when it came out in 2015, and no summer blockbuster
since has been able to match its turbocharged ingenuity.

Even Oscar-winning auteurs have been awed by George Miller’s operatically
staged spectacle. “Parasite” director Bong Joon Ho
[said](https://www.reddit.com/r/MadMax/comments/e2affc/fury_road_made_parasite_director_bong_joon_ho_cry/)
last year that the scale of the movie brought him to tears, while Steven
Soderbergh put it more bluntly: “I don’t understand how they’re not still
shooting that film,” he [said](https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/steven-
soderbergh-refining-his-logan-lucky-experiment-quieting-ego-1056505) in a 2017
interview, “and I don’t understand how hundreds of people aren’t dead.”

So how did Miller and his cast pull it off and survive to tell the tale?

Five years after “[Fury
Road](https://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/15/movies/review-mad-max-fury-road-
still-angry-after-all-these-years.html)” was released, I asked 20 of its key
players what making it was like. Though its post-apocalyptic plot is
deceptively simple — road warrior Max (Tom Hardy) and the fierce driver
Furiosa (Charlize Theron) must race across the desert to escape the vengeful
Immortan Joe and his fleet of kamikaze War Boys — filming the movie was
anything but easy.

“Like anything that has some worth to it, it comes with complicated feelings,”
Theron said. “I feel a mixture of extreme joy that we achieved what we did,
and I also get a little bit of a hole in my stomach. There’s a level of ‘the
body remembers’ trauma related to the shooting of this film that’s still there
for me.”

“It was one of the wildest, most intense experiences of my life,” said the
actress Riley Keough, while her co-star Rosie Huntington-Whiteley added, “You
could have made another movie on the making of it.” As for Hardy? “It left me
irrevocably changed,” he said.

Here, in the cast and crew’s own words, is how a nearly impossible project
managed to become an Oscar-winning action masterpiece.

 _After making three progressively bigger “Mad Max” movies — the 1979 original
as well as “The Road Warrior” (1981) and “Mad Max Beyond Thunderdome” (1985) —
Miller let the franchise he created lay dormant until 1998._

 **GEORGE MILLER** (director) **** For so long, whenever the idea of another
“Mad Max” movie came up, I thought there wasn’t much more I could do with it,
but I specifically remember the moment that changed. I was crossing the street
in Los Angeles and this very simple idea popped in my head: “What if there was
a ‘Mad Max’ movie that was one long chase, and the MacGuffin was human?” I was
flying back to Australia a month later, ruminating on it, and by the time I
landed, I called Doug Mitchell and said, “I think I’ve got an idea.”

 **DOUG MITCHELL** (producer) There were a number of names thrown out for the
female lead back when we first started, [like] Uma Thurman.

 **MILLER** I remember we were talking about Charlize even then. Her agent
said she wasn’t interested, but I mentioned it to her over a decade later, and
she said, “No one ever told me!”

 _With the series’ star Mel Gibson set once again to play Max, the plan was to
shoot “Fury Road" for 20th Century Fox. Dozens of expensive vehicles and set
pieces were built for a shoot scheduled for March 2003._

 **MILLER** Then 9/11 happened and everything changed. We couldn’t get
insured, we couldn’t get our vehicles transported. It just collapsed.

 **COLIN GIBSON** (production designer) I was in Namibia in 2003 when I got
the call to stop spending money. I don’t know whether [the studio] decided to
reroute their money back to the Iraq war, or if it was the email I got from
Mel Gibson’s wife asking me how many Muslims there may or may not be in
Namibia and, therefore, how interested she may or may not be in the whole
family coming to visit.

 _Miller pivoted to directing the animated film “Happy Feet,” and when it
proved to be a box-office success for Warner Bros., he was able to convince
the studio to take on “Fury Road.” Still, his longtime leading man Mel Gibson
was now in his 50s and considered a Hollywood pariah. Miller and Mitchell
decided to search for a new Max._

 **MITCHELL** Mel is obviously blighted by a number of things that everyone in
the world knows about, even though he’s a highly gifted filmmaker and a
brilliant actor and a lovely guy behind that demon that sometimes pops out.
But he was too old at that point. It just didn’t make sense.

 **ZOË KRAVITZ** (Toast, one of the five “wives” fleeing Immortan Joe) **** I
did a chemistry test with Jeremy Renner reading for Max, because they hadn’t
hired Tom yet.

 **MILLER** I had the same feeling about Tom that I had when Mel Gibson first
walked into the room: There was a kind of edgy charm, the charisma of animals.
You don’t know what’s going on in their inner depths, and yet they’re
enormously attractive.

 **TOM HARDY** (Max) I hadn’t done that much action at that time, certainly
not with this level of involvement. The nature and sheer scale and volume of
action set pieces was unlike anything I had experienced.

 **CHARLIZE THERON** (Furiosa) I grew up on all the “Mad Max” movies — they’re
very popular in South Africa. I remember being 12 and my dad letting me watch
it with him. So I was like, “Oh yeah, I wanna be in a ‘Mad Max’ movie. Are you
kidding me?”

 **RILEY KEOUGH** (Capable, another one of the Immortan’s escaped “wives")
They were holding crazy, nontraditional auditions in Australia. They’d have
bunches of us, five to six girls, go through this audition process with no
scenes from the film but a lot of improv, a lot of acting-class stuff. We had
no idea if we’d get chosen or not, and out of my group, I was the only one who
got selected.

 **KRAVITZ** When they cast me, I was brought to a room that I wasn’t allowed
to leave, and I sat there and read the script. It was one of the strangest
scripts I’d ever seen, because it was like a really long comic book.

 **JOHN SEALE** (cinematographer) I couldn’t make head nor tail of it, so I
gave up. I thought, “They’ve been in preproduction for 10 years, let’s just go
make it.”

 _With his cast in place, Miller set a late-2010 shoot in Broken Hill,
Australia, the desert mining town where he had filmed the first two “Mad Max”
movies._

 **THERON** The roughest moment was when we were in Australia, two weeks away
from shooting, and they pulled the plug on us.

 **MITCHELL** During preproduction, the weather pattern changed in Australia
and it rained and rained in Queensland, the sort of weather that happens once
in a century.

 **GIBSON** Slowly, what was desert turned into beautiful flowers. So we put
everything into storage and slunk away yet again.

 **KEOUGH** It was the first time I had experienced a big push on a film, and
I was heartbroken. I was like, “Is it really because of the weather? Am I
fired?”

 **MITCHELL** We were basically defeated. How do we move on?

 _But Miller refused to give up on the film._

 **MILLER** I said, “Let’s wait a year and see if it all dries up.” And when
we saw that it wouldn’t, I decided we should to go back to Namibia, where it
never rains.

 **MARGARET SIXEL** (editor and Miller’s wife) It was kind of nuts to take all
those people and all those vehicles to Namibia. Who would do that? I guess
that’s George. He isn’t like other people, really — which is what I love.

 _In July 2012, a year and a half after the planned Broken Hill shoot, filming
finally commenced on “Fury Road” in the Namibian desert._

 **KEOUGH** It was the craziest thing you could imagine, and the craziest
thing I’ve ever experienced. For one, it felt very real, which is why it looks
so incredible. Everyone in this film was so excited to be their characters
that walking around on set was like actually walking around in that world. It
was almost like a cosplay thing.

 **NICHOLAS HOULT** (Nux, one of the Immortan’s War Boys) Hugh, who played the
Immortan, would put photos of himself all around the stunt gym where the War
Boys trained.

 **HUGH KEAYS-BYRNE** (Immortan Joe) It was a wonderful thing to feel everyone
around me crashing about in their costumes and absolutely living it.

 **COURTNEY EATON** (Cheedo, another “wife”) I had never acted in my life
before, except for drama class in school. When I got to set and they asked me
to stand on my mark, I turned around and said, “I don’t know what that means.”

 **KRAVITZ** There was something really beautiful about how inexperienced a
lot of us were — we were so down for the cause. I don’t know what it would be
like if you had five actresses who’d been working for a long time that would
call their agents and be like, “What the hell is going on here?”

 **ROSIE HUNTINGTON-WHITELEY** (the “wife” Splendid) I’ve lived with Jason
[Statham] for 10 years, and I’ve never known him to have an experience like
it. I remember explaining it to him, and he said, “Wow, this is so different
from how I’ve ever gone to work.”

 _The spectacular action sequences were difficult to stage, but they had a
sense of actual weight and physics that had been lost in a decade and a half
of CGI spectacle._

 **GIBSON** All the action had to be real. The hair can’t stand up on the back
of your neck — not for me, anyway — watching Vin Diesel drag a three-ton safe
down through perfect right-angle turns on the street. The whole rationale was
to make it as real as possible so that as much as possible was at stake.

 **HARDY** As we dug in, it was dangerous, or certainly could have been
extremely so, if it weren’t for the methodical professionalism and preparation
of the experts: stunt coordination, stunt team and riggers.

 **BEN SMITH-PETERSEN** (stunt performer) On most films like this, you’re
working your way up to a stunt — maybe there’s one a week. But on this film,
from the time your day starts, you’re already doing a stunt and then there’s
another one on top of that. It was a stuntman’s dream.

 **HOULT** I remember turning up one day, and they strapped me under the War
Rig in a harness.

 **KRAVITZ** Everything you see is really happening, there’s no green screen.
I’m really being [pulled out of the truck](https://youtu.be/Mk_C5QH2Eb8?t=134)
and going super high in the air — and I’m pretty sure that’s Riley’s husband,
Ben, who grabbed me and pulled me out. They met on the movie.

 **KEOUGH** We ended up falling in love. So my husband’s a War Boy.

 _Many of the young actresses were cast as the sex slaves Furiosa was trying
to smuggle to freedom. To help them better understand their characters, Miller
engaged a surprising recruit: “The Vagina Monologues” playwright Eve Ensler,
who was working with Congolese survivors of gender violence._

 **EVE ENSLER** It was really surprising for me, too! George would send me
pieces of the script for feedback, and we began to get into a dialogue about
the women who were going to play the sex slaves and how they would know what
that lived experience was. Eventually, he invited me to Namibia to spend time
with them in workshops, and my contribution was really to help those actresses
become confident in that world. I think it was a really radical thing that he
asked me to do that.

 **KRAVITZ** Even if a lot of the women’s history wasn’t in the dialogue, it
was really important to George that we understood what we were running from.

 **HUNTINGTON-WHITELEY** The workshopping process was really emotional. Having
grown up with a very pleasant childhood in a middle-class family in the U.K.,
it was a big shock to the system.

 **KRAVITZ** We would do exercises like writing letters to our captor, really
interesting stuff that created deep empathy. I’m glad we had that, because it
was such a crazy experience — so long and chaotic — that it would be easy to
forget what we were doing if we didn’t have this really great foundation that
we could return to.

 **KEOUGH** I thought it was amazing that George cared so much. It could have
just been like, “This is a big Hollywood movie, now put on your bathing suits
and get outside.”

 _But the film’s centerpiece character was the determined, resourceful
Furiosa._

 **HARDY** Charlize arguably laid down the finest lead character in an action
movie, and that credit is much deserved, in my opinion; both to her as a
phenomenal talent and also to George for recognizing from the very start that
it was time to pass Mel’s shoes onto Furiosa.

 **THERON** At first, Furiosa was this very ethereal character, with long hair
and some African mud art on her face. It was a different costume designer back
then, before Jenny Beavan, and the costume felt a little more Barbarella-y. I
worried about it.

 **JENNY BEAVAN** (costume designer) I am not into fashion, and I don’t
particularly care what people look like — the clothes have to come out of the
stories they tell. Since she travels long distances, Furiosa needed very
practical clothing, and when I met with Charlize, that was one of the things
we talked about. That, and what on earth would she do with her hair?

 **THERON** George was really incredible in just hearing me out. I called him
and said, “I don’t know how she’s getting by in the mechanics’ room with all
this hair. I think we need to shave my head, and she needs to be a more
androgynous, grounded character.” You know, he trusted me so much that it kind
of makes me emotional. In that sense, I feel like I let him down.

 _Tensions could run high on the set, where the principal cast was crammed
into one vehicle for most of the blockbuster-length shoot._

 **THERON** The biggest thing that was driving that entire production was
fear. I was incredibly scared, because I’d never done anything like it. I
think the hardest thing between me and George is that he had the movie in his
head and I was so desperate to understand it.

 **SIXEL** It was very difficult for the actors, because there’s no master
shot, no blocked-out scenes. Their performances were made of these tiny little
moments.

 **SEALE** (cinematographer) It was tough for them. The crew can be protected
by the elements — the cold and wind and sand — but they can’t. They’re wearing
a wardrobe that is very specific.

 **ABBEY LEE** (the Dag, another “wife”) It looks warm, but we shot it in the
winter and it was blisteringly freezing. Us girls weren’t wearing much, and
Riley got hypothermia.

 **KEOUGH** There were night shoots that were brutal, and there was so much
dust that your face would be covered with three inches of sand by the end of
the day. We kept it together pretty well, I think, for the first five months.

 **KRAVITZ** By the end, we wanted to go home so badly. It had been nine
months, and not nine months where you’re in a city and you hang out in your
trailer. It was nine months of the environment you’re seeing in the movie,
with nothing around. You really do start to lose your mind a little bit.

 **MILLER** There was a high degree of difficulty on the film, and unless you
are entirely rigorous about safety, something is inevitably going to go wrong.
That was my biggest anxiety — it’s something I’d experienced before [when [a
stuntman broke his leg](https://uproxx.com/filmdrunk/watch-original-road-
warrior-stunt-man-guy-norris-break-his-femur-in-this-incredible-featurette-
from-1981/)], and it gnaws at you. I guess the actual working process of the
actors, I probably should have paid more attention to.

 **THERON** All of those young girls kind of turned to me as someone who would
problem-solve for them, and this is not anybody’s fault — I only say this now
because I know George and I’ve experienced this with George, so I’d fully
trust him. But I’ve also trusted directors fully when I didn’t comprehend what
they were trying to do, and it just turned into a mess.

 **HUNTINGTON-WHITELEY** There was a lot of tension, and a lot of different
personalities and clashes at times. It was definitely interesting to sit in a
truck for four months with Tom and Charlize, who have completely different
approaches to their craft.

 **HARDY** Because of how much detail we were having to process and how little
control one had in each new situation, and how fast the takes were — tiny
snippets of story moments were needed to make the final cut work — we moved
fast, and it was at times overwhelming. One had to trust that the bigger
picture was being held together.

 **KRAVITZ** Tom really had moments of frustration, of anger. Charlize did,
too, but I feel like he’s the one who really took it out on George the most,
and that was a bummer to see. But you know, in some ways, you also can’t blame
him, because a lot was being asked of these actors and there were a lot of
unanswered questions.

 **THERON** In retrospect, I didn’t have enough empathy to really, truly
understand what he must have felt like to step into Mel Gibson’s shoes. That
is frightening! And I think because of my own fear, we were putting up walls
to protect ourselves instead of saying to each other, “This is scary for you,
and it’s scary for me, too. Let’s be nice to each other.” In a weird way, we
were functioning like our characters: Everything was about survival.

 **HARDY** I would agree. I think in hindsight, I was in over my head in many
ways. The pressure on both of us was overwhelming at times. What she needed
was a better, perhaps more experienced, partner in me. That’s something that
can’t be faked. I’d like to think that now that I’m older and uglier, I could
rise to that occasion.

 **LEE** The grueling nature of the shoot really served it, in my opinion. The
characters are supposed to be exhausted, they’re supposed to be searching for
strength. I just don’t think that any of the performances would have been the
same had it all been green-screen and we did it in a controlled environment.
The fact that it was a huge mess is why it’s so brilliant.

 _As the shoot continued into late 2012, the Warner Bros. studio head Jeff
Robinov prepared to intercede. _

**GIBSON** There’s a lack of control you have when you’re sitting in Los
Angeles and 600 people are wandering the desert with what’s left of your
money.

 **KRAVITZ** We were behind schedule, and we heard the studio was freaking out
about how we were over budget.

 **SEALE** The president of Warner Bros. flew to Namibia and had a gold-plated
fit.

 **MILLER** Jeff was in a bake-off with Kevin Tsujihara about who was going to
head the studio, and he had to assert himself to show his superiors that he
was in command and a strong executive. I knew what he was going through, but
it wasn’t going to do anybody any good at all. [Robinov could not be reached
for comment.]

 **MITCHELL** He said, “The camera will stop on Dec. 8, no matter what you’ve
got, and that’s the end of it.” We hadn’t shot any of the scenes in the
Citadel yet, where the opening and closing book ends of the film are set, and
we had to go into postproduction without them. It was almost incomprehensible.

 **SIXEL** I was worried about George. You wouldn’t even know the half of it,
let me tell you. You should have seen him by the end of the shoot, he was so
thin.

 **IOTA** (the Doof Warrior, a War Boy who wields a flame-spewing guitar) I
saw him deteriorate over that six months. He looked so shattered by the end.

 _Still, Miller could not lose faith: He had to continue searching for a way
to complete his film._

 **MILLER** A younger filmmaker who has done very well called me before his
first feature and said, “Any tips?” I told him, “The day will come on the
shoot when you think you’re completely crazy and what you’re doing makes no
sense. Just keep going.” When he finished that film, he told me, “Remember
what you said? What you didn’t tell me is that it’s going to happen every
day.” And it’s true.

 **SIXEL** It was really difficult to spend that year cutting a film that
didn’t have an opening or closing. I kept thinking, “How am I going to make
this work? Are we going to write voice-over and try to fill in all the gaps
during the opening chase?”

 **MITCHELL** What happened then is that Jeff lost his job and Kevin Tsujihara
was appointed, and he decided later that year, “You know what, let’s do this
properly. We need to shoot these scenes at the Citadel.” So we brought back
all these vehicles from Namibia, reassembled the team in late 2013, and
brought Tom and Charlize to Australia. It could have been completely
different, had the gods not been shining down.

 _Though Tsujihara permitted Miller a month of additional shooting, studio
executives remained skeptical as he worked on the final cut._

 **SIXEL** There was this constant thing from the studio: “How much shorter is
it?” That’s all they wanted to know. I just got so sick of it. They were just
obsessed with getting the film under 100 minutes, which I knew was impossible.

 **MILLER** When someone is directing a film, they’re thinking about it every
waking hour, and even processing it in their dreams. The problem is, if you’re
a studio executive, you tend to think about it for 10 minutes on a Wednesday.

 **SIXEL** It was an incredibly painful film to cut. I think the studio didn’t
believe in it, so it was really difficult to keep going. Eventually George and
I decided, “We’re just going to make the film we want to make, and if no one
else likes it, that’s fine.” And that last four months is when the film really
came together.

 _In May 2015, “Fury Road” was released to rave reviews, starting with its
Cannes Film Festival premiere. At a news conference there, Hardy apologized to
Miller for the times he felt frustrated during the shoot: “There is no way
George could’ve explained what he could see in the sand when we were out
there. I knew he was brilliant, but I didn’t quite know how brilliant.”_

 **HARDY** As the reality of his accomplishment soaked in for me, I felt it
was the right thing to say in the moment.

 **KRAVITZ** As an actor, you make a lot of movies — some of them are good and
some of them are bad, and you have to kind of let that go. But with this one,
it really felt like we put our actual blood, sweat, tears and time into it,
and if it hadn’t been good, I would have been devastated. It was one of the
hardest things I’ve ever done in my life, but it was absolutely worth it, and
I would do it again if George asked me to.

 **SIXEL** When we actually finished the film and it was a success, that was
the best year we ever had. We’d repeat the stories of making the film to each
other over and over again: How did we get to the other side? We still kind of
marvel at it.

 **MILLER** In Japan, there was a critic who was telling me about the film,
and I was astonished by the degree to which he read the subtext, all the stuff
you hope is there. I said, “How many times did you see the film?” He said,
“Only once. Can I show you something?” And he opened up his shirt, and he had
the logo of the Immortan tattooed in red on his chest. So when you see things
like that, you’re sort of humbled by it.

 _“Fury Road” earned $374 million worldwide and was nominated for 10 Oscars,
including best picture and best director. Though it didn’t win either of the
top prizes, the film took six Oscars in categories like editing, production
design and costume design._

 **MILLER** Not for a moment did we think “Fury Road” would be anything like
an Oscar movie.

 **SIXEL** Half the time, I thought I was going to get fired off the film, and
then I win an Oscar! How about that? We were just disappointed that George
didn’t win, but basically, they were all his Oscars in a way.

 **SEALE** We had a lovely guy in England come up to us and say, “I voted for
you guys, and I’ll tell you why: I look at a film and think, ‘In 20 years’
time, will I remember that film?’ And in 20 years, I know I’ll remember ‘Fury
Road.’”

 _Years after its release, the film’s themes of female empowerment, class
inequality and environmental collapse are more relevant than ever._

 **MITCHELL** What an extraordinary experience to have a film that was so
difficult, that may never have been made, and at the end of the day it wins
Academy Awards and is called [one of the best films of the
decade](https://www.nytimes.com/2019/11/24/movies/best-
movies-2010s-decade.html).

 **MILLER** When the ideas that you start off with are then comprehended by an
audience at large out there, that’s ultimately what redeems the process for
you. The Swahili storytellers have this quote: “The story has been told. If it
was bad, it was my fault, because I am the storyteller. But if it was good, it
belongs to everybody.” And that feeling of the story belonging to everybody is
really the reward.

