---
title: "CDC is worried Americans arenâ€™t following its advice" 
date: 2020-06-04 
draft: false 
---

Story source:

https://www.cnbc.com/2020/06/04/coronavirus-cdc-is-worried-americans-arent-following-its-advice-as-us-cases-continue-to-rise.html


CDC Director Robert Redfield said Thursday that he's "very concerned" the
agency's public health message on the coronavirus isn't "resonating" with the
public as the number of cases continues to rise across the U.S.

Testifying before the House Appropriations Committee, Redfield said he sees "a
lot of people" not wearing masks in Washington, D.C., where he works, while
many people do wear masks in his hometown of Baltimore. Crowds of people have
been seen in recent weeks at protests, over the Memorial Day holiday and,
Redfield noted, at the SpaceX launch Saturday.

Huge crowds gathered at Florida's space coast Wednesday to [watch SpaceX's
first attempt at launching astronauts to
space.](https://www.cnbc.com/2020/06/02/nasa-astronauts-hopelaunch-is-an-
inspiration-during-time-of-unrest.html)

During the hearing, House Democrats grilled Redfield on President [Donald
Trump](https://www.cnbc.com/donald-trump/)'s push for states to reopen after
shutting down as part of social distancing measures meant to curb the spread
of the virus.

All 50 states have begun easing quarantine restrictions even though Redfield
said "not all states" have met the White House criteria for reopening
businesses.

"We will continue to message as well we can," said Redfield, who's on the
White House coronavirus task force. "We're going to encourage people that have
the ability to require to wear masks when they are in their environment to
continue to do that."

The coronavirus, which emerged about five months ago, has sickened more than
1.8 million people and killed at least 107,175 in the United States, according
to data compiled by Johns Hopkins University. While cases have slowed in hot
spots such as New York state, the U.S. is still seeing roughly 20,000 new
Covid-19 cases a day.

When asked by Rep. Rosa DeLauro, D-Conn., if there was any evidence the virus
has become less contagious, Redfield simply said, "No."

The hearing comes as the CDC's response to the pandemic comes under scrutiny
by former officials and infectious disease experts. A [New York Times
report](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/06/03/us/cdc-coronavirus.html) published
Wednesday detailed some of the CDC's early missteps, including the delay of
coronavirus test kits. The CDC declined The New York Times' requests to
interview top CDC officials, the Times said.

The CDC has remained largely quiet on the pandemic. Agency officials haven't
held a coronavirus-related briefing in more than two months. Last month, the
agency [quietly released detailed
guidance](https://www.cnbc.com/2020/05/20/coronavirus-cdc-quietly-releases-
detailed-guidelines-for-reopening-us.html) for reopening schools, mass transit
and nonessential businesses that had been shut down in an attempt to curb the
spread of the coronavirus in the U.S.

Redfield also warned Thursday that protests across the U.S. and other parts of
the world over the death of George Floyd at the hands of Minneapolis police
[could be a "seeding event" for more coronavirus
outbreaks.](https://www.cnbc.com/2020/06/04/cdc-warns-george-floyd-protests-
may-be-seeding-event-for-more-coronavirus-outbreaks.html)

He said he would like to see people who took part in the protests get tested
for the virus in the next few days.

"I do think there is a potential, unfortunately, for this to be a seeding
event," he said. "And the way to minimize that is to have each individual to
recognize it is an advantage of them to protect their loved ones, to [say]
'hey, I was out, I need to go get tested.'"

Public health specialists warn [that a slow burn of infection through the
summer](https://www.cnbc.com/2020/06/03/as-states-reopen-and-protests-rage-
the-coronavirus-lays-the-foundation-for-a-nasty-fall.html) could lead to a
massive resurgence this fall.

Redfield told lawmakers the U.S. is likely to have a "difficult time" during
the fall and winter seasons as the coronavirus and flu circulate at the same
time.

In April, Redfield [first warned](https://www.cnbc.com/2020/04/22/trump-says-
cdc-directors-coronavirus-warning-was-totally-misquoted.html) about the colder
seasons, saying, "we're going to have to distinguish between which is flu and
which is the coronavirus."

