---
title: "Scientists have turned the structure of the coronavirus into music" 
date: 2020-05-10 
draft: false 
---

Story source:

https://www.sciencemag.org/news/2020/04/scientists-have-turned-structure-coronavirus-music


# Scientists have turned the structure of the coronavirus into music

By [Vineeth Venugopal](/author/vineeth-venugopal)Apr. 3, 2020 , 4:05 PM

**Science ’s COVID-19 reporting is supported by the Pulitzer Center.**

You’ve probably seen dozens of images of the novel coronavirus—now responsible
for 1 million infections and tens of thousands of deaths. Now, scientists have
come up with a way for you to hear it: by translating the structure of its
famous spike protein into music.

The sounds you hear—the chiming bells, the twanging strings, the lilting
flutes—all represent different aspects of the spikelike protein (above) that
pokes from the virus’ surface and helps it latch onto unsuspecting cells. Like
all proteins, the spikes are made of combinations of amino acids. Using a new
technique called sonification, scientists from the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology assigned each amino acid a unique note in a musical scale,
converting the entire protein into [a preliminary musical
score](https://soundcloud.com/user-275864738/viral-counterpoint-of-the-
coronavirus-spike-protein-2019-ncov).

But in real life, these amino acids tend to curl up into a helix or stretch
out into a sheet. Researchers capture these features by altering the duration
and volume of the notes. Molecular vibrations due to heat also get their own
sounds.

But why would you set a virus to music? The new format can help scientists
find sites on the protein where antibodies or drugs might be able to
bind—simply by searching for specific musical sequences that correspond to
these sites. This, the researchers say, is faster and more intuitive than
conventional methods used to study proteins, such as molecular modeling. They
add that by comparing the musical sequence of the spike protein to a large
database of other sonified proteins, it might be possible to one day find one
that can stick to the spike—preventing the virus from infecting a cell.

As for the instruments, they were entirely the researchers’ choice. In this
case, a Japanese koto plays the main notes—soothing sounds that might bring
some comfort in a time of trouble.

### Related

