---
title: "Distributed is to 2020 what the Cloud was in 2008" 
date: 2020-06-04 
draft: false 
---

Story source:

https://techcrunch.com/sponsor/oyster/the-dawn-of-the-distributed-age/


## The shift to more distributed organizational forms is going to be bigger
for business than the shift to the Cloud.

Let’s start with a simple analogy: What the Cloud was to 2008, the Distributed
Organization is to 2020.

What do I mean by that? Think organizational disruption on a global scale.
Think new ways of working, new ways of interacting. Think new organizational
structures and forms. Think about the dissolution of numerous formidable
barriers—literally _physical_ barriers—that have long prevented organizations
from operating more efficiently and effectively. Think new kinds of
competition in the marketplace, competition driven by those organizations that
have embraced the distributed paradigm and can draw on the expertise of the
best and brightest from around the globe to deliver solutions at a far lower
cost, far more quickly than an office-centric organization could possibly
achieve.

Hopefully it is clear to you that what I’m talking about when I talk about “
_distributed organizations”_ — this is not simply a model in which an office-
centric organization occasionally allows its employees to work from home.
Think bigger. A distributed organization is one that can engage talent
wherever that talent resides—the world is their oyster—and empowers its
employees to work from wherever they want to work. A distributed organization
does not need to bring employees into a shared office space because it is
understood that today’s shared office space contributes far less to the
productivity and effectiveness of employees it might have at an earlier point
in history when many office resources needed to be shared. In fact, shared
office space often accomplishes quite the opposite. Rather than increasing
individual productivity and effectiveness, it creates distractions and
resentments.

For many, the notion that distributed operations might actually be a viable
alternative to office-centric operations is an idea that has flickered into
life only recently. The arrival of the novel Coronavirus in 2020 has forced a
sudden and unprecedented upheaval in the way most organizations have
traditionally operated. Stay-at-home orders suddenly went into effect in a
world where 44% of companies did not allow remote work at all.[1] Indeed,
going to an office was an option open only to those whose work was deemed
essential. For the rest of us, if we were going to work we were going to have
to do it from somewhere other than the office.

What’s surprising to many employers and employees alike is that working
remotely is working out pretty well.

As of April 2, 2020, barely a month into the imposition of stay-at-home orders
across the US, Gallup reported that 62% of employed Americans were working
remotely.[2] Compare that to figures collected before the outbreak of the
pandemic, when a mere 3.6% of the entire US workforce worked remotely more
than 50% of the time.[3] The Gallup survey also found that 59% of workers
would prefer to continue to work remotely, even after the stay-at-home orders
are lifted.[4]

This is the dawn of the Distributed Age. Going forward, regardless of when the
world is “allowed” to go back into the office, more and more companies will
embrace remote workers. More and more startups will appear that will embrace a
[fully-distributed](https://blog.oysterhr.com/) model from inception. And
while all of this sounds like a subtle shift in a work-at-home policy, it’s
really much more than that. We’re about to see a massive transformation in
business, the impact and effects of which will eclipse the shift to the Cloud
in 2008.

## Separation of winners from losers

Businesses that embraced the cloud in the early days gained advantages over
competitors who did not, and so it will be now for organizations that embrace
a distributed model. Distributed organizations will empower people to maximize
their individual strengths—working late if they are night owls by nature,
working without the distraction of long (and usually unnecessary meetings),
working in the physical setting that they find most conducive to their
productivity, and more. Distributed organizations will also focus on building
global teams based upon complementarity of talent and diversity of
perspective, rather than what’s available near a physical location. Drawing on
like-minded talent from all over the world, the most attractive and
inspirational companies will be able to assemble extraordinary teams that will
do extraordinary things.

This is a “super-power” of distributed organizations, says Chris Herd, CEO of
Firstbase, a firm that outfits the employees of distributed organizations with
office tools and equipment. Distributed organizations, or remote-first
organizations as he refers to them, can grow “the size of the pond that they
can hire from, while at the same time increasing the bait that they have to
get people to bite and join the company.”[5]

While _any_ organization can evolve into a distributed organization, those
that move sooner will be more likely to thrive than those that move
later—because the companies starting life today as distributed organizations
have less legacy infrastructure, investments, and traditions to weigh down
their balance sheet. Companies forming today as distributed entities have no
physical real estate; they have no conference rooms, cafeterias, or
custodians. That dramatically reduces their cost of operations. Combine those
lower structural costs with a team of experts plucked from around the
globe—rather than a 30 mile circle around a given office—and it becomes clear
why an organization that embraces distributed can compete more effectively and
win more frequently.

## Shifting VC investment

How does one kick a virtual tire? Once, in a pre-COVID-19 world, that question
might have held sway among venture capitalists. They often really did want to
visit the physical offices and see the plants before making an investment. But
in the world of COVID-19, even the VCs are phoning it in, and they have begun
to realize that there are in fact a number of ways to kick a virtual tire.

Access to cloud services has made it easy for distributed organizations to
start up anywhere in the world. They can show investors that they’re
attracting top talent from all over the world and delivering that MVP sooner
and with far less capital. VCs can see the logic of the distributed
opportunity, and their own experiences with remote operations during the
pandemic provide more than reasonable reassurance that investing in
distributed startups is a smart move. Conversely, as the successes and
competitive advantages of distributed companies become more evident, it is
possible that an office-centric approach will be seen as a negative and
investments in such start-ups may diminish. The weight that an office-centric
organization must drag along with it will hinder its ability to compete in a
market where distributed organizations are crushing it.

Moreover, as the number of distributed companies multiplies, so will an
ecosystem of supporting services and enablements focused on distributed teams
and orgs. Companies like Loom and Notion, that were already building solutions
designed for distributed teams are going to experience growth. And, much as we
saw a decade ago with the Cloud, many new businesses are now going to get
created in response to the needs of distributed organizations. Distributed is
a large space in which to create new companies, and investors can see that.
[Oyster](https://www.oysterhr.com/) itself is a fully-distributed company,
purpose-built to help other distributed organizations extend their reach and
hire the talent that can transform their business, no matter where they happen
to live.

## The unsustainability of the Status Quo

The lived experience of distributed work during the pandemic is the horse
escaping the proverbial barn. Most workers don’t want to go back to the office
and work the same way they had before. Force that on them and many will
eventually bolt, quickly seizing offers from companies that _will_ support
their desire to work remotely. The power has
[shifted](https://blog.oysterhr.com/2020/05/08/the-remote-work-power-shift/).
There will be an inevitable decline in the quality of talent employed by firms
that insist on an office-centric model, just as there will be an inevitable
rise in the level of talent opting to work for firms that embrace the
distributed model. Where, in that dynamic, would _you_ rather work?

These dynamics will have ramifications in many different dimensions – in
commercial and residential real estate, in the rollout of broadband and
wireless telecommunications services, in consumer demands for public
transportation and automobiles. Demands will change and this will ripple
through communities far and wide. For distributed companies, the absence of a
need to invest in physical facilities may enable a greater amount of
investment to be directed at product and service development and distribution;
it may facilitate the hiring of more staff in more locations. And, again, all
this will stimulate a level of competitive advantage that an office-centric
company, intractably bound to a costly physical infrastructure, will
ultimately find impossible to challenge.

## The HR business function fully transformed

The Cloud age sparked the transformation of IT and turned data into business
gold. Similarly, the Distributed age is going to spark the transformation of
HR and People Ops. The distributed company is going to redefine the basic
relationship between its talent and how work gets done by embracing technology
in new ways and by embracing new rhythms, like asynchronous communication.

Individuals with innovative titles like “Head of Remote” are going to be among
the most influential leaders in this new age, as they are going to help their
organizations turn their human talent into gold. For the HR function, it’s
going to mean a change to everything from sourcing, to hiring, to onboarding,
and the myriad ways the people organization supports its workforce. We’re
going to continue to see innovation in the operational enablement of
distributed teams (by which I mean all the tools and processes that make it
possible for a distributed team to function). The digital experience for
distributed teams of the future is going to be amazing. Facebook is probably
working on VR for work as we speak. We’re also going to see the emergence of
new kinds of physical experiences, and uses of “office space” that will cater
more directly to the social and human side of work.

The next time you return to the office it may be for a yoga lesson with your
boss, rather than a meeting.

#### By Tony Jamous, CEO of Oyster™

