---
title: "Lancet retracts paper that halted hydroxychloroquine trials" 
date: 2020-06-05 
draft: false 
---

Story source:

https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/jun/04/covid-19-lancet-retracts-paper-that-halted-hydroxychloroquine-trials


The Lancet paper that halted global trials of hydroxychloroquine for Covid-19
because of fears of increased deaths has been retracted after a Guardian
investigation found inconsistencies in the data.

The lead author, Prof Mandeep Mehra, from the Brigham and Women’s hospital in
Boston, Massachusetts decided to ask the Lancet for the retraction because he
could no longer vouch for the data’s accuracy.

The journal’s editor, Richard Horton, said he was appalled by developments.
“This is a shocking example of research misconduct in the middle of a global
health emergency,” he told the Guardian.

A Guardian investigation had revealed errors in the data that was provided for
the research by US company Surgisphere. These were later explained by the
company as some patients being wrongly allocated to Australia instead of Asia.
But more anomalies were then picked up. A further Guardian investigation found
that there were [serious questions to be
asked](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/jun/03/covid-19-surgisphere-who-
world-health-organization-hydroxychloroquine) about the company itself.

An independent audit company was asked to examine a database provided by
Surgisphere to ensure it had the data from more than 96,000 Covid-19 patients
in 671 hospitals worldwide, that it was obtained properly and was accurate.

Surgisphere’s CEO, Sapan Desai, had said he would cooperate with the
independent audit, but it is understood he refused to give the investigators
access to all the data they asked for.

In a statement on Thursday, Mehra said: “Our independent peer reviewers
informed us that Surgisphere would not transfer the full dataset, client
contracts, and the full ISO audit report to their servers for analysis as such
transfer would violate client agreements and confidentiality requirements. As
such, our reviewers were not able to conduct an independent and private peer
review and therefore notified us of their withdrawal from the peer-review
process.”

The Lancet study had a dramatic impact on attempts to find out whether the
antimalarial drug hydroxychloroquine, and its older version, chloroquine,
could help treat patients with Covid-19. The US president, Donald Trump was
among those who backed the drug before any high-quality trial evidence had
been published.

The World Health Organization and several countries suspended randomised
controlled trials that were set up to find an answer. Those trials have now
been restarted. Many scientists were angry that they had been stopped on the
basis of a trial that was observational and not a “gold standard” RCT.

Mehra had commissioned an independent audit of the data after scientists
questioned it.

In its investigation, the Guardian [put a detailed list of concerns to Desai
about the database, the study findings and his
background](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/jun/03/covid-19-surgisphere-
who-world-health-organization-hydroxychloroquine). He responded: “There
continues to be a fundamental misunderstanding about what our system is and
how it works.

“There are also a number of inaccuracies and unrelated connections that you
are trying to make with a clear bias toward attempting to discredit who we are
and what we do,” he said. “We do not agree with your premise or the nature of
what you have put together, and I am sad to see that what should have been a
scientific discussion has been denigrated into this sort of discussion.”

Shortly after the Lancet retracted its study, the [New England Journal of
Medicine retracted a paper based on the Surgisphere
database](https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMc2021225), also co-
authored by Mehra and Desai. The study purported to include data from Covid-19
patients from 169 hospitals in 11 countries in Asia, Europe and North America.
It found common drugs given for heart disease were not associated with a
higher risk of death in Covid-19 patients.

In a statement, published by the journal, the authors said: “Because all the
authors were not granted access to the raw data and the raw data could not be
made available to a third-party auditor, we are unable to validate the primary
data sources underlying our article, ‘Cardiovascular Disease, Drug Therapy,
and Mortality in Covid-19’. We therefore request that the article be
retracted.

“We apologise to the editors and to readers of the Journal for the
difficulties that this has caused.”

