---
title: How AI Helps HR? 
date: 2019-05-22 
draft: false 
---

Story source:

https://recruitingblogs.com/profiles/blogs/how-ai-helps-hr


[![](https://storage.ning.com/topology/rest/1.0/file/get/1907992514?profile=RESIZE_710x)](https://storage.ning.com/topology/rest/1.0/file/get/1907992514?profile=original)Artificial
intelligence is the buzzword these days. According to IDC, by 2020, the AI
market will grow to $47 billion influencing in every business sector. HR
industry has also started using this fast-paced technology to simplify its
operations.

A common scenario in an HR department is that managers are engrossed with day-
to-day activities. This includes screening candidates, taking interviews,
making salaries, dealing with various compliance issues, managing internal
communication and much more. Technology makes sure that HR managers and
professionals start doing smart work by saving their time and efforts. The
routine management tasks tend to become monotonous and can be completed by AI
in a go.

**How AI helps HR?**

**Recruiting**

Recruitment is one area, the scope of which can be enhanced and improved
through automation. There are number of software which helps recruiters find
the best fit for their company. Chatbots are an amazing source of interaction
which helps candidates learn about the company where they would like to apply
for a job. There are many scenarios in the recruitment process where
technology plays an important role.

A [resume parser](https://www.rchilli.com/solutions/resumeparser-api) helps in
screening the right candidate by extracting data from resumes and putting it
in pre-designed fields. This helps the recruiters to shortlist candidates
according to the requirements.

A step ahead in automation is providing relevant matches to recruiters. This
is done through Semantic search and match. There are intuitive software which
provides similar resume recommendations matching a resume or job. Thus, an
employer need not search for more resumes if he is not satisfied with the
resume selected initially.

Old database is usually of no use for employers. However, you can enrich your
resumes by adding new and updated information in them. Resume enrichment is a
fantastic recruiting tool which fetches candidate information from their
social media profiles.

**An Enhanced Performance Review**

Managers spend a lot of time in creating performance reviews. NLP has taken
this process to a new level. Employee data can be kept at one place which is
easy to manage. An employeeâ€™s work can be easily reviewed by the system and a
project or a new task can be suggested according to his profile. Thus, HR
managers do not need to spend time collecting data, devising strategies and
reviewing the performance of employees. All these activities can be done
through a single click.

**Functions like a Human**

Professionals fear that artificial intelligence will take up all our jobs
within a few years. But this is just a myth. Technology will not eliminate
human intervention rather it will make it more humanized. This can be
explained through an example:

A company needs a leader for a project. The system checks data of internal
employees and finds potential fits. HR manager selects an employee for the new
task and the system informs the employee about his promotion. In case, there
is a need to undergo training, the employee is asked to fill an application
for attending the same.

**Recognizing Emotions**

The face of HR is changing with the course of time. Employers are working with
the belief that an engaged workforce delivers excellent results. HR managers
create strategies and organize activities to keep the staff in high spirits.
They are concerned about the emotions of their employees and technology can
surely help to assess the same. Time is not far away when facial recognition
technology can tell what affects the mood of an employee. It will prove to be
very useful for managers who can create strategies to keep their employees
happy.

**Less Human Bias**

Recruiters are sometimes criticized over hiring candidates of their choice or
someone who is known to them. As automation will screen candidates based on
their skills and experience, there is less chance of being biased towards an
applicant. This gives candidates an equal chance of competing against merit.
Thus, automation reduces chances of favoritism.

AI has created ripples in the HR industry. It is a fact that more [intelligent
HR solutions](https://www.hrzone.com/community/blogs/lovepreet-dhaliwal/when-
ai-meets-hr-a-road-to-success) will be created when technology is combined
with human efforts. It can create more happy workers and a happier workplace.
Thus, debunk the myth of losing your job to technology. It will rather make
you more productive and ensure quality results.

