---
title: IT Outsourcing Trends for 2019 
date: 2019-05-22 
draft: false 
---

Story source:

https://medium.com/@halyna.sereda/it-outsourcing-trends-for-2019-830a5944f45


IT outsourcing allows companies to grow without taking major risks or making
huge investments.

There are several types of outsourcing, which are offshoring, nearshoring and
onshoring, that all have one thing in common — a third party performs certain
business tasks for the client. The main difference between those types lies in
the location of the third party whose services the organization intends to
use. It can be either a local company or the one that operates
internationally.

### Top IT Outsourcing Trends for 2019

In [Gravum](https://www.gravum.com/software-development/top-it-outsourcing-
trends-for-2019/?utm_source=medium) have collected several main trends that we
believe will continue to dominate the industry in 2019.

#### Changes in the relationship between a client and an IT service provider

The focus will be shifted from price to process and people management. Cost
reduction will still be an important factor for outsourcing, but the value
delivered will be evaluated based on several components, including
effectiveness and relationship building.

#### Multiple IT outsourcing providers

Companies will continue to enjoy a great supply of talented and professional
third-party vendors and may use the services of several of them at a time. The
trend that started in 2017 will continue to prevail, with the majority of
businesses being interested in outsourcing their services to multiple vendors.

#### Alternative IT outsourcing destinations

India and China used to be the primary destinations of outsourcing for around
a decade, but things change. Some countries in Central and Eastern Europe,
including Ukraine, Belarus, Poland, and Romania, provide stiff competition to
well-known destinations.

#### Innovative contract models

Clients and IT service providers are interested in changes that would
stimulate their growth. New contracting forms allow for changing the format of
business relations and help them make IT outsourcing more value-driven.

#### Outsourcing to the core

Businesses have started outsourcing their internal business processes and core
business services to their vendors. As a part of the strategy, this allows for
greater business growth and risks minimization.

#### Cloud sourcing

Currently, most businesses are busy with migrating to cloud, and this provides
an extra opportunity for data storage [IT outsourcing
services](https://www.gravum.com/software-development/top-it-outsourcing-
trends-for-2019/?utm_source=medium). Maintaining servers is expensive, so
cloud outsourcing is growing in demand.

