---
title: "Watch Free Movies with Zinitevi" 
date: 2020-06-05 
draft: false 
---

Story source:

https://www.apkndroid.download/zinitevi-apk/


# Zinitevi apk

![Zinitevi apk](https://ik.imagekit.io/lpwd3ifkx/zinitevi-apk/logo.png)
Download

## Zinitevi app? What is this application?

Are you looking for an amazing application for _streaming movies and TV
series_? **Download Zinitevi apk** to your Android device for unlimited and
free movies and TV series.

![Zinitevi apk](https://ik.imagekit.io/lpwd3ifkx/zinitevi-apk/zinitevi-
apk_4.jpg)

## Why do you need to download Zinitevi app?

This is not a serious question, as the Zinitevi app is the leading online
streaming application which available for Android and iOS platforms. On the
other hand, the Zinitevi app makes sure you safe when you are using the
Zinitevi application.

If you are seeking a fast, secure and reliable Android application to watch
free movies and TV series, download _Zinitevi apk_ without any hesitation as
thousands of users prove that the Zinitevi app is the best one even for free.

### Zinitevi Developer Credits

This amazing Zinitevi application is a result of a huge contribution. We
respect that great work from our bottom of the heart and we wish for the
developer who made this app to succeed in his future works as this Zinitevi
app. You can visit his own webpage for the Zinitevi app and you can donate for
him to making this application. All the images, logos and other copyright
material are properties of their respective owners. We are only sharing
information about this app. You can download the Zinitevi from its original
web source.

Zinitevi Developer :- <https://zinitevi.github.io/movieapps/>

### How Zinitevi app works?

The working process of Zinitevi app is hard to explain as the developer. But
we can have a general knowledge about how Zinitevi app works? This is all
about sending and receiving data over the internet between servers and users.
The Zinitevi app server is faster than other ordinary servers as it is working
at super speed to deliver a maximum user experience.

When you download _Zinitevi apk_ and install it on your Android device, the
Zinitevi app installs its programs and functions to ensure the process of
streaming is ongoing up to the mark. To run this amazing video streaming app,
you do not need any third-party applications such as rooting apps of mod apps.

The Zinitevi app is all in one app to process all of the streaming works
together to increase user flexibility and user experience.

* * *

VIDEO

* * *

## Features of Zinitevi app

#### 01\. Multi-language subtitles

The Zinitevi app has inbuilt subtitles library to watch movies and TV series
with multi-languages. As an example, if you are watching a Spanish movie, you
can add English subtitles to the Zinitevi player without downloading or adding
subtitles externally.

#### 02\. Watch online and offline

If you have time to watch movies and TV series online, you are welcome to
**watch online** with Zinitevi app video player. But if you have enough time
to watch online, you can download and save them to the app and watch later.
You can manage the time with a schedule with this app is you can watch both
online and offline videos without wasting your time on unnecessary downloading
and also you can save your mobile data as you can manage your time.

#### 03\. Use favorite lists

The Zinitevi app has a favorite list feature to add any movies or TV series to
favorite list. When you add movies or TV series to your favorite list, it will
save on a new tab which you can visit any time and play it again without
finding the entire video library.

#### 04\. Save watched movies and TV shows

When you finish watching a movie or TV series, you can add them to the watch
list as you can shift to new movies and TV shows without forgetting previously
watch videos. On the other hand, the watched list is important to share the
experience with your friends. You can show them movies and TV series from the
watched list to explain them correctly.

* * *

![Zinitevi download](https://ik.imagekit.io/lpwd3ifkx/zinitevi-
apk/Zinitevi_infro.jpg)

* * *

### Is your device need root before using the Zinitevi app

Simply you do not need to install any third-party applications to use the
Zinitevi app on your Android device. All you need to download just the
Zinitevi app and install it on your device. The Zinitevi app capable of
running without rooting. If you are already used any rooting app on your
Android device, it alright to use your rooting app alongside the Zinitevi app,
otherwise, the Zinitevi app does not require any direct integration with
rooting apps.

* * *

## Zinitevi app for PC

There are two methods to watch movies and TV series with Zinitevi app through
your PC.

#### Method 01

To use this method, you need to install Zinitevi app on iOS or Android. When
you are watching a video using Zinitevi app video player, there is a Wi-Fi
icon on the top. You can click that button to get a link that particular video
that you are watching. Then you can paste the link to your computer browser
and watch it through your Mac or Windows PC.

#### Method 02

If you are wondering whether the Zinitevi app is installable on PC or not,
it's yes. The Zinitevi app is able to install on PC.

To install Zinitevi PC, you need to use an Android emulator. If you are not
installed any Android emulator on your PC, first install an Android emulator.

After installing an _Android emulator_ on your device, just click add apk
button and select the downloaded **_Zinitevi apk_** file. Then follow the
simple installation process. After that, you can open the Zinitevi app through
the Android emulator on your PC.

* * *

#### Zinitevi app Screenshots

![Zinitevi apk download](https://ik.imagekit.io/lpwd3ifkx/zinitevi-
apk/Zinitevi_screenshot-1.jpg) ![Zinitevi apk
download](https://ik.imagekit.io/lpwd3ifkx/zinitevi-
apk/Zinitevi_screenshot-2.jpg) ![Zinitevi apk
download](https://ik.imagekit.io/lpwd3ifkx/zinitevi-
apk/Zinitevi_screenshot-3.jpg)

* * *

### Zinitevi app for iOS

Zinitevi app is available for iOS too. Most of the online video streaming
applications are available for Android. But to be grateful for the developer,
this amazing app is available for iOS. So you can install the Zinitevi app on
your iPhone and iPad. You do not need to jailbreak your Apple device to
install the Zinitevi on your Apple device. You can install this application
simply with easy installation steps.

If you are seeing the message “Untrusted Enterprise Developer error” while you
are installing the Zinitevi app on your Apple iOS device, just go to settings
and enable the feature which is noted below.

`Settings / General / Profiles & Device Management / (Profile Name) / Trust /
Trust`

* * *

### System requirements for Zinitevi (Android)

  * Android 5.0 or later
  * 20MB of storage space

* * *

## How to install Zinitevi apk on Android

First, you need to download the Zinitevi apk file to your Android device. Then
you need to tap on downloaded Zinitevi apk file and start the installation
process. If you asked to install from “Unknown Sources” by default, just say
yes and continue the installation process.

If you are not asked to install from “Unknown Sources” while the installation
process, then you must enable the feature. Use the source below to enable the
feature.

`Settings > Security > Unknown Sources`

Again if you get a notification “Blocked by Play Protect” click “install
anyway” buy selecting more details from the pop-up window.

Then follow the next simple steps to complete the installation process.

* * *

#### Select Languages

* * *

## FAQ

#### Zinitevi app not working?

If your Zinitevi app is not opening or working, first you should delete the
Zinitevi app and other data about the Zinitevi app on your device. Then
restart your Android device. The download _Zinitevi apk_ again to your Android
device and start to install the Zinitevi app again.

#### My Zinitevi app crashed, what should I do?

First, restart your Android device and check whether the app is opening again.
If it is not opening properly, delete then app and its folder and again
install **_Zinitevi apk_** on your Android device.

#### Is Zinitevi app free to use?

Yes, it’s totally free to use. You are not forced to pay when you are watching
movies and TV shows. If you are satisfied with this amazing app, you can
contribute to the developer to appreciate his great work, use the developer’s
page donation button to pay your kindness and encourage him.

### Download Zinitevi app

Download latest version of [Zinitevi
app](https://github.com/ZiniTevi/movieapps/raw/master/apps/zinitevi.apk)

* * *

