---
title: Setting Up a Pi Hole Made My Home Network Faster 
date: 2019-05-22 
draft: false 
---

Story source:

https://www.brianchristner.io/how-a-single-raspberry-pi-made-my-home-network-faster/


Our household has a few Raspberry Pi's doing various tasks from tracking
airplanes flying overhead, measuring temperature humidity in our house, Docker
projects, and several more hidden away for a rainy day. The rainy day finally
arrived when I stumbled across a new project. This time it is entirely
different (I always say this). However, it's true. This Raspberry [Pi project
Pi Hole ](https://pi-hole.net/)is the gatekeeper to our home network.

Traditional Ad Blockers are usually Browser Plugins or software utilities on
every computer on your network. Managing all your devices is cumbersome, hard
to maintain, and leaves a gaping hole for network-connected devices like TV's,
Printers, Alexa's, Sonos, or any other smart devices which connect to your
network. The Pi Hole blocks Ads, Malware, and overreaching metrics collection
network-wide. Since I [switched to SimpleAnalytics
](https://www.brianchristner.io/transforming-into-an-open-business/)to stop
tracking people on our websites I thought to apply the same principle to our
home network. Now I get to decide how I server metrics and ads as well.

How does the Pi Hole work though? The Pi Hole answers your computer’s DNS
queries and if it is a domain on the blacklist, it sends the request to the Pi
Web server. This Web server just serves up a blank page. So instead of loading
the ad from the real domain, the blank page from the Pi is downloaded, thus
“blocking” the ad or metric.

![](https://www.brianchristner.io/content/images/2019/03/pihole-traditional-
dns-1024x630.png)

## Installing Pi Hole

Installing Pi Hole should increase performance and security simultaneously for
our home network. The risk of the project is a single Raspberry Pi is now the
single point of failure for my network, so reliability becomes a concern. I am
entirely confident to rely my entire home infrastructure on a $35 Raspberry Pi
running an Open Source project.

Like any other project I run everything in a Docker container, and this
project should be no different. The Pi Hole project already has a nice Docker
project utilizing compose. The [Pi Hole Docker install](https://github.com/pi-
hole/docker-pi-hole) is well documented and quite nicely done. After
installing Docker on the Raspberry Pi it was an easy git clone, a couple of
modifications to select my timezone and preferred DNS servers ([CloudFlare
1.1.1.1](https://1.1.1.1/)), then docker-compose up, and we were in business.

Once Pi Hole is running, it is time to switch over my network to the Pi Hole.
I configured my router to use the Pi Hole IP address as the new DNS server for
my network. That's it! Now every device that connects to my router is now
taking advantage of Pi Hole.

## Pi Hole in Operation

Now that my network is funneling through the newly configured Pi Hole it's
time to take a look at the Dashboard. The dashboard is a friendly interface
which greets you with some fantastic statistics and visualizations right off
the bat.

  * Total Queries
  * Queries Blocked
  * Percent Blocked
  * Domains Blocked
  * Queries last 24 hours

![](https://www.brianchristner.io/content/images/2019/03/Screen-
Shot-2019-02-27-at-23.10.46.png)

The menu bar on the left side of the Dashboard offers even more functionality.
We can whitelist or blacklist URLs, query log files, update the URL block
list, and all sorts of reporting options. The level of detail and
functionality is impressive and adds confidence. Considering all the
functionality and that my entire network is now routing through my Raspberry
Pi 2, the performance is phenomenal running average 8% memory utilization.

## Review after 1 month in operation

The Pi-Hole has been running for 1 month now on my home network. I have had to
whitelist 1 or 2 URLs which was blocking a reset of an Alexa which had an
issue, and a video conferencing system had all sorts of tracking and metrics
built in which were causing some havoc until I whitelisted them. Otherwise,
the Pi has been chugging along at 8% memory utilization, and the network is
considerably faster when surfing the web. The Pi Hole project even offers some
ad-heavy websites to test to check the difference before and after
<https://pi-hole.net/pages-to-test-ad-blocking-performance/>, and it is
incredible the difference.

Statistically speaking our household is averaging 15% of queries blocked and a
spike over a bad weather weekend of 30% blocked. It is scary and incredible to
think the number of ads and metrics forced upon us, and this number continues
to increase. I am delighted with the Pi Hole project and am recommending it to
all.

## Next Steps

Since I am so impressed with the performance and security, the next step is to
install this in our 56K.Cloud office. It is also interesting how we could set
up a secondary Pi so we could have a primary and secondary DNS server for our
office.

The other functionality I am researching is the Open VPN option
<https://docs.pi-hole.net/guides/vpn/overview/> running in one of our cloud
providers so I can take advantage of the Pi Hole on our cellular networks
while on the go.

