---
title: "Amazon will now deliver to the trunk of your Honda (2019)" 
date: 2020-05-10 
draft: false 
---

Story source:

https://www.engadget.com/2019-07-23-amazon-key-in-car-delivery-honda.html


![Honda to Offer Key by Amazon In-Car Delivery  for Eligible HondaLink®
Remote Services
Subscribers](https://o.aolcdn.com/images/dimse/5845cadfecd996e0372f/92f17836bf5f6bddb8fdc8d1f45d17ba6551c1ed/cmVzaXplPTIwMDAlMkMyMDAwJTJDc2hyaW5rJmltYWdlX3VyaT1odHRwcyUzQSUyRiUyRnMueWltZy5jb20lMkZvcyUyRmNyZWF0ci11cGxvYWRlZC1pbWFnZXMlMkYyMDE5LTA3JTJGMGQ4ODczNTAtYWEwNy0xMWU5LTlmZTUtZDE2MmZmYjhkMjViJmNsaWVudD1hMWFjYWMzZTFiMzI5MDkxN2Q5MiZzaWduYXR1cmU9MDVhOTU1MDVmYTVkNWQ4ODkyYmMyOTQwZGEyNjY4MDJkMzc1MWY3NA==)

Due to the way the service works, you'll need to meet quite a few requirements
to be able to take advantage of it and thwart your local porch pirate. Your
Honda vehicle needs to be one of the eligible Accord, Accord Hybrid, Insight,
Passport, Pilot and Odyssey trims. Further, you'll have to be a Prime member
and located in one of the 50 cities covered by the service.

You'll start seeing in-car delivery as an option after downloading the Key by
Amazon app, logging in using your Amazon account, keying in your vehicle's
information and giving it your HondaLink credentials. If you do choose to get
in-car delivery, you'll need to park within two blocks of your delivery
address between 11AM and 3PM. The delivery driver will then locate your
vehicle using its GPS location, unlock and relock it all without any
interaction from you. While the HondaLink app itself is free, the Remote
Services package will set you back $110 per year after a 3-month trial. Key by
Amazon doesn't cost anything on top of that, though, so it's a nice perk if
you're already paying for the add-on.

 **Update:** The post has been updated to correct that the driver unlocks and
relocks the vehicle without customer interaction.

