---
title: "TF Card vs. SD Card" 
date: 2020-05-10 
draft: false 
---

Story source:

https://www.oxpoon.com/tf-card-vs-sd-card/


## **What is TF card?**

TF cards are commonly used on smartphones, iPods, PDAs, digital cameras and
other electronic devices.

**TransFlash(TF)** Cards are similar to SD cards and also known as SDHC cards,
TransFlash cards were introduced jointly by SanDisk and Motorola in 2004. A TF
card can be considered the smallest memory card in the world with a size of (
11x15x1mm ). It is a quarter of the size of an SD card.

The T-Flash card is the smallest flashcard on the market and is suitable for a
number of multimedia applications. As TF card adopt the design of SD
structure, so the SD Association officially renamed it as Micro SD at the end
of 2004 to make it a member of SD products.

**MicroSD** is the smallest removable memory cards. TF cards, also called
Micro SD cards, range in available sizes from 128 MB to 4 GB, and are often
used with cell phones and other devices that have a microSD card slot. Today,
the Micro SD card comes with 128gb, 512 Micro SD Card and other ranges
available online.

## **What is SD Card?**

  
SD Card also called Secure Digital Card, SD card was launched by Panasonic,
Toshiba and SanDisk jointly released in August 1999. SD card is a new
generation memory device based on Semiconductor Flash memory.

### **Types of SD cards**

There are three versions of the SD card, here we present SD card version along
with their physical dimensions, are shown below.

  * **SD** – 32mm x 24mm x 2.1mm.
  * **MiniSD** – 21.5mm x 20mm x 1.4mm.
  * **MicroSD** – 15mm x 11mm x 1.0mm.

## **What are the differences between TF card and SD card?**

Normally we call memory card as SD card. But in fact, what we call them is
inaccurate, there are many types of memory cards, SD card is only one of them,
and one of them is Micro SD Memory Card (TF card). So you are wondering to
know what is the difference between TF card and SD card? we will explain in
detail about the difference between TF card vs SD card.

### **Different name**

The SD card is known as Secure Digital Card and TF(TransFlash), also known as
MicroSD memory card. TransFlash was renamed to MicroSD because it was adopted
by the SD Association(SDA).

### **Different Size between SD Card and Micro SD Card**

The size of the SD card is larger than that of the Micro SD card, simply
speaking the size of both memory cards is very different in size.

The specific size of the TF (Micro SD) card is 15 mm x 11 mm x 1 mm, while the
SD card is 24 mm x 32 mm x 2.1 mm.

### **Different definition**

SD cards are the new generation of memory devices based on semiconductor flash
memory.

TF card is a very small flash memory card that adopts the latest NAND MLC
technology and controller technology invented by SanDisk Company.

## **Conclusion**

There are many differences between SD cards and TF cards, but their essence is
the same — they are all memory cards. If you want to select these two types of
memory cards separately, then the SD card is often used for the camera, and
the TF card is used for the camera, smartphone and GPS.

