---
title: "France, Germany back European cloud computing 'moonshot'" 
date: 2020-06-05 
draft: false 
---

Story source:

https://www.reuters.com/article/us-europe-tech/france-germany-back-european-cloud-computing-moonshot-idUSKBN23B26B


FILE PHOTO: The logo of Amazon Web Services (AWS) is seen during the 4th
annual America Digital Latin American Congress of Business and Technology in
Santiago, Chile, September 5, 2018. REUTERS/Ivan Alvarado

BERLIN/PARIS (Reuters) - France and Germany threw their weight on Thursday
behind plans to create a cloud computing ecosystem that seeks to reduce
Europe’s dependence on Silicon Valley giants Amazon, Microsoft and Google.

The project, dubbed Gaia-X, will establish common standards for storing and
processing data on servers that are sited locally and comply with the European
Union’s strict laws on data privacy.

German Economy Minister Peter Altmaier, speaking in Berlin, described Gaia-X
as a “moonshot” that would help reassert Europe’s technological sovereignty,
and invited other countries and companies to join.

“We are not China, we are not the United States, we are European countries
with our own values and with our own economic interest that we want to
defend,” his French counterpart Bruno Le Maire said in Paris in a joint video
news conference.

The initiative comes as France and Germany step up economic cooperation to
offset the impact of the coronavirus pandemic. Both have backed an EU-wide
recovery plan while Berlin has just announced a major fiscal stimulus.

In an initial step, 22 French and German companies will set up a non-profit
foundation to run Gaia-X, which is not conceived as a direct rival to the
“hyperscale” U.S. cloud providers but would instead referee a common set of
European rules.

“Building a European-based alternative is possible only if we play
collectively,” said Michel Paulin, CEO of independent French cloud service
provider OVHcloud.

One important concept underpinning Gaia-X is “reversibility”, a principle that
would allow users to easily switch providers. First services are due to be
offered in 2021.

That is already far too late, according to analysts at Gartner, who forecast
that the global market for public cloud services will grow by 17% to $228
billion this year. “The leading cloud providers have already moved quickly to
build up this market,” said Gartner analyst Rene Buest.

Writing by Douglas Busvine; Editing by Frances Kerry

