---
title: "Boston Dynamics RoboDogs Remind Visitors of Safe Distancing Rules at Public Park" 
date: 2020-05-08 
draft: false 
---

Story source:

https://www.straitstimes.com/singapore/robot-reminds-visitors-about-safe-distancing-measures-in-bishan-ang-mo-kio-park


SINGAPORE - A four-legged robot will be patrolling Bishan-Ang Mo Kio Park to
remind people of safe distancing measures starting from Friday (May 8).

Called Spot, the robot will assist with safe distancing efforts at parks,
gardens and nature reserves managed by National Parks Board (NParks) and at
parks managed by town councils.

The pilot trial is jointly conducted by NParks, and the Smart Nation and
Digital Government Group (SNDGG).

The Spot robot will broadcast a recorded message reminding park visitors to
observe safe distancing measures.

It is fitted with cameras, enabled by GovTech-developed video analytics, to
help it estimate the number of visitors in the parks.

The cameras, however, will not be able to track or recognise specific
individuals, neither will it collect any personal data.

As part of the two-week trial, Spot will be deployed over a 3km stretch in the
River Plains section of the park during off-peak hours, and it will be
accompanied by at least one NParks officer.

If the trial proves successful, NParks will consider deploying Spot for safe
distancing efforts at Bishan-Ang Mo Kio Park in the morning and during evening
peak-hours.

NParks is also looking into deploying the robot at other parks such as Jurong
Lake Gardens.

Originally developed by American company Boston Dynamics, the four-legged
robot is able to navigate obstacles more effectively compared to wheeled
robots, making it suitable for different terrains.

It is also fitted with safety sensors to detect objects and people within 1m
to avoid collision.

![](https://www.straitstimes.com/sites/default/files/articles/2020/05/08/photo6172332655845157486.jpg)  
As the robot is four-legged, it is able to navigate obstacles more effectively
compared to wheeled robots, making it suitable for different terrains. ST
PHOTO: GIN TAY  

![](https://www.straitstimes.com/sites/default/files/articles/2020/05/08/photo6172332655845157485.jpg)  
The robot is fitted with safety sensors to detect objects and people within 1m
to avoid collision. ST PHOTO: GIN TAY  

GovTech has enhanced Spot with various functions such as remote control,
3D-mapping and semi-autonomous operations to facilitate the trial.

It is currently looking to develop analytics allowing Spot to check if park
visitors are observing safe distancing measures.

As it is controlled remotely, less manpower is needed for park patrols,
helping to minimise physical contact among staff, safe distancing ambassadors
and park visitors. This helps to lower their risk of exposure to the Covid-19
virus.

NParks is also deploying 30 drones to detect visitorship at selected parks and
nature areas.

In addition, the Safe Distance At Parks portal lets the public find parks near
them, as well as check the crowd situation at the parks before making their
way there.

The Spot robot is also currently on trial at the Changi Exhibition Centre
community isolation facility, which houses patients with mild symptoms, to
help deliver essential items such as medicine to patients.

The SNDGG will also be exploring the use of the robot in supporting other
Covid-19-related operations across agencies.

Last month, an autonomous robot known as O-R3 [was deployed at Bedok Reservoir
Park by national water agency PUB as a kind of safe distancing
ambassador.](https://www.straitstimes.com/singapore/health/coronavirus-out-
for-a-run-pubs-robots-will-remind-you-to-keep-your-distance)

The four-wheeled robot was originally used for surveillance, but it now
broadcasts safe distancing messages at the park as it patrols the area in the
mornings and the evenings when human traffic is at its highest.

Similar robots will be deployed at Pandan and MacRitchie reservoirs.

