---
title: First Look at the PinePhone Dev Kit Running KDE Plasma Mobile and PostmarketOS 
date: 2019-05-22 
draft: false 
---

Story source:

https://liliputing.com/2019/04/first-look-at-the-pinephone-dev-kit-running-kde-plasma-mobile-postmarketos.html


# First look at the PinePhone dev kit running KDE Plasma Mobile & PostmarketOS

04/11/2019 at 9:25 AM by [Brad Linder](https://liliputing.com/author/admin)
[12 Comments](https://liliputing.com/2019/04/first-look-at-the-pinephone-dev-
kit-running-kde-plasma-mobile-postmarketos.html#comments)

The folks at Pine64 are working on a Linux-powered smartphone that could sell
for as little as $149. It’s called the PinePhone, and the team [unveiled the
project](https://liliputing.com/2019/01/pinephone-linux-smartphone-to-sell-
for-149-dev-kits-coming-soon.html) and launched a development kit earlier this
year.

Now that developers are starting to work with that pre-release hardware, we’re
getting our first look at what the phone could look like when it’s running
GNU/Linux-based software.

Photos of a dev kit booting PostMarketOS with the KDE Plasma Mobile user
interface were [posted recently](https://ameridroid.com/blogs/ameriblogs/news-
pinephone-running-postmarketos) to the PinePhone developers Telegram group.

![](https://i0.wp.com/liliputing.com/wp-
content/uploads/2019/04/plasma_01.jpg?resize=368%2C500&ssl=1)

There’s nothing all that surprising in the photos… but it’s nice to see that
it works. Plasma Mobile is a touch-friendly user environment from the folks
who make the KDE desktop environment. It has touch-friendly icons along the
bottom of the screen for quick access to features like the phone app, camera
app, file manager, and web browser.

As for the [PinePhone
itself](http://wiki.pine64.org/index.php/Project_Don%27t_be_evil), a prototype
is expected in the third quarter of 2019, and Pine64 hopes to ship the phone
in the fourth quarter of the year, assuming software is ready by then.

The phone is powered by an Allwinner A64 ARM Cortex-A53 processor and features
2GB of RAM, 32GB of storage, a 1440 x 720 pixel display, 4G LTE Cat 4 support,
802.11n WiFi, and Bluetooth 4.0.

It has a 5MP rear camera and 2MP front camera, a headphone jack, and a microSD
card reader. There may also be privacy features such as physical kill switches
for the wireless hardware, cameras, and speakers.

While the PinePhone certainly won’t be the most powerful smartphone on the
market by the time it’s ready for release, it will be a lot cheaper than some
of the other GNU/Linux phones in the works, such as Purism’s Librem 5, which
is [up for pre-order for $649](https://shop.puri.sm/shop/librem-5/).

