---
title: Of Late Replies and Failing Love 
date: 2019-05-22 
draft: false 
---

Story source:

https://www.innfinity.in/stories-apne-apne/raj-deepali-pandey-3/


As I was sitting with one of my friends, swiping in his phone the photos of
his latest vacation, a WhatsApp notification popped up. It was a message from
his girlfriend Ria. “Hey babe, how was your day?” Smiling at this underrated
but much needed gesture of today’s era, I passed his phone to him.

  
He read the message from the notification itself and handed me back the phone.
“Did you have a tiff with her?” I questioned him, unable to fathom his
behaviour. “No yar, I’ll reply in a while.” Trying to mind my own business and
not to dig into their life, I resumed watching the photos. Within two minutes
another “hey wassup” popped up on his phone. It was from one of his work
colleagues. I again showed him his phone, knowing it was futile but since it
was his property so I did it as a matter of courtesy.

[![](https://www.innfinity.in/wp-
content/uploads/2019/04/texting-1024x768.jpg)](http://www.dazzlejunction.com/generators/image-
generator.php "html image code")

  
To my utter surprise, he took the phone and immediately texted her back. “Are
you sure you and Ria are getting along well together?” I asked again.
“Yah…what makes you think otherwise?” He answered, while his eyes were glued
to the phone. “You chose to ignore her message while you are chatting with
another girl…so…” I stopped after making my thoughts obvious. He took a deep
breath and showed me his texts with his colleague where they were having
casual, harmless conversations. “I’m not that kind of man, you know that.” I
smiled and said, “When did I say that you are cheating your partner and
flirting with other hotties? But all I meant was, isn’t it unfair to ignore
your girlfriend’s message and make it seem that you are busy and at the same
time have conversations with another girl?” “I don’t think so, as long as I
know my limits.” I knew he took the hint but was adamant to admit that he was
wrong. Seeing my confused look he resumed, “Okay so tell me, what would happen
if I would text her instantly? A string of messages would follow and then I
would need to answer them all. It’s better to reply late and avoid the burden
of instant answers to all the queries.” He answered, still chatting with his
colleague.

[![](https://media.istockphoto.com/photos/what-is-in-your-phone-concept-
picture-
id1125375251?k=6&m=1125375251&s=612x612&w=0&h=H8aAxjnh2VvNwGcvkVEFxZexYpvOt6ztjxOzSoENcy4=)](http://www.dazzlejunction.com/generators/image-
generator.php "html image code")

  
“Will you like it if you ever come to know that your girl is “harmlessly”
texting another guy while pretending to be busy for you?” I asked my question
out of the blue, expecting a miraculous change of heart in him.

“I don’t know” was all he could say, running short of words.

“Ever heard of the term ‘micro cheating’? Maybe that’s what you are doing
every now and then.” I looked away from him, trying to make my dramatic words
sound casual.

[Now follow INNFINITY on Flipboard](https://flipboard.com/@INNFINITY)

“If ignoring your partner every now and then while texting others of opposite
sex is [micro cheating](https://www.cosmopolitan.com/sex-love/a18930027/how-
to-tell-if-youre-micro-cheating/), then I think all the romantic
[relationships](https://www.innfinity.in/limitless/brutal-truths-about-a-
relationship-you-should-realise/) of this era have one micro cheater. One who
always makes less efforts and yet gets more privileges. The myth of
“Relationships are a 50- 50 affair” has been busted now. Its always 60- 40,
70- 30 and even 90- 10. Today she is always the one who texts me first and
calls me first and replies to my texts in the shortest time possible. I get
all the attention and affection I desire. If I would start paying more
attention to her and give it all before her asking I’ll be putting myself in
the vulnerable position of the relationship where she’ll start caring less and
taking it for granted. But that doesn’t mean I don’t love her and don’t care.
I have just defined the limits of expressing my love where it won’t hurt me
and put me at the receiving end of the relationship. I am making less efforts
yet I am receiving full attention and affection, I would be a fool to waive it
off by letting my emotional side supersede me.” He completed his words,
resumed texting. This time, after almost half an hour of her text, he texted
her back “My day was fine, what about yours?”

[![](https://www.maxlovemessages.com.ng/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/love-
messageslove-
messages-756x500.jpg)](http://www.dazzlejunction.com/generators/image-
generator.php "html image code")

The complexity of the figures of love really went beyond my head. Only if we
ever realised that 50- 50 efforts is much better, simple, fruitful and
satisfying, our generation won’t be so notoriously known for pretentious busy
lives, heartbreaks and failing love.

