---
title: Apple makes it harder to accidentally sign up for subscriptions 
date: 2019-05-22 
draft: false 
---

Story source:

https://9to5mac.com/2019/04/11/app-store-subscriptions-confirm/


Seemingly in an effort to combat the ongoing problem of accidental App Store
subscriptions, Apple has added an extra step to the subscription process in
the App Store. Apple will now present users with a “Confirm Subscription”
popup before finalizing the details.

![](https://i1.wp.com/9to5mac.com/wp-content/uploads/sites/6/2018/02/sylvania-
homekit-strips.jpg?resize=300%2C250&quality=82&strip=all&ssl=1)

### Sylvania HomeKit Light Strip

This change was first noted by developer [David Barnard on
Twitter](https://twitter.com/drbarnard/status/1116447489022996480) this
afternoon. Starting sometime in the last week, Apple has added an additional
step to the subscription process. After you authenticate via Touch ID or Face
ID, you’ll see a pop-up asking you to confirm your subscription:

> **Confirm Subscription**

>

> The subscription will continue unless canceled in Settings at least one day
before a subscription period ends.

Accidental subscription signups have been a major problem, especially for
users with Touch ID iPhones. Essentially, users would see a subscription popup
and immediately press the Home button to try and exit the app. When they
placed their finger on the Home button, Touch ID would instead authenticate –
signing users up for a subscription.

Apple has taken [several steps to counteract
problems](https://9to5mac.com/2019/01/25/apple-revamps-documentation-for-app-
subscriptions-details-how-billing-amounts-should-be-clearly-presented-to-
users/) with [hidden and devious
subscriptions](https://9to5mac.com/2018/10/18/apple-subscription-rejection-
deceptive/) in iOS apps. Earlier this year, the company revamped documentation
for app subscriptions, explaining that developers must clearly present the
subscription price and other details.

The new confirm subscription step rolled out sometime in the last week, making
it an unusual change that wasn’t included in a standard update to iOS.
Nonetheless, it’s great to see Apple making things clearer for iOS users. What
do you think about this change? Let us know down in the comments.

**Read more:**

[![ESR iPad Accessories](https://9to5mac.com/wp-
content/uploads/sites/6/2020/03/ESR-iPad-
cases.jpg?quality=82&strip=all&w=750)](https://amzn.to/2UcjB49)

* * *

[_Subscribe to 9to5Mac on YouTube for more Apple
news:_](https://www.youtube.com/c/9to5mac?sub_confirmation=1)

VIDEO

