---
title: "Disney+ Streaming Service Launches (Available Nov 12)" 
date: 2019-05-23 
draft: false 
---

Story source:

https://www.engadget.com/2019/04/11/disney-plus/


![Disney](https://o.aolcdn.com/images/dims?resize=2000%2C2000%2Cshrink&image_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fs.yimg.com%2Fos%2Fcreatr-
uploaded-
images%2F2019-04%2F6f8af9e0-5cac-11e9-9daf-10c7242787a2&client=a1acac3e1b3290917d92&signature=e04ffec5f77babe8602d9902c237a7ab9b351253)

### Content

As we knew, _Captain Marvel_ will be a streaming exclusive on Disney+ from day
one, and the company said all of the _Cars_ movies will be there also. Disney
also showed off the _Falcon & Winter Soldier_ spinoff show we'd heard about,
and revealed a new show from Jeff Goldblum produced by National Geographic
that's in development. _Frozen 2_ will be a streaming exclusive by the time it
comes home next, and the first one, along with the rest of Disney's Signature
movies will be streaming on day one.

Kevin Feige came out to announce Marvel's plans, and also revealed another
short series on the way, _WandaVision_ starring Scarlet Witch and Vision, and
an unnamed series that will bring back Tom Hiddleston as Loki. Meanwhile,
Marvel Studios will also explore the MCU in "fresh and exciting ways" with
animated series that use the same voices as the films, including one that
explores what-if Peggy Carter had received the super soldier serum.

Lucasfilm exec Kathleen Kennedy announced that Star Wars live-action show
[_The Mandalorian_](https://www.engadget.com/tag/themandalorian/) has finished
filming and will be available at launch with the new service. She also
confirmed another show starring Diego Luna, as well as the new season of _The
Clone Wars_ it's making for Disney+.

Disney itself is also making several live-action entries for the service,
including the holiday film Noelle starring Anna Kendrick, and a live-action
version of _Lady & the Tramp_, with a cast that includes Tessa Thompson,
Justin Theroux, Sam Elliott and Janelle Monae.

National Geographic will bring many shows from its library to the service from
day one, and two exclusive new shows. One is _The World According to Jeff
Goldblum_ , as the actor goes in-depth with various items and ideas. The other
one is called _Magic of the Animal Kingdom_ , which is set at Disney's Animal
Kingdom and Epcot Seabase Aquarium, providing an "all access pass" at the work
going on there and around the world to protect the animals.

Even Disney Channel is getting into the act. There's a new Phineas and Ferb
movie on the way plus _High School Musical: The Musical: The Series_ , to go
along with 5,000 episodes of Disney Channel content and 100 Disney Channel
movies ready to stream from day one.

Just to recap: In year one Disney is promising all of the Pixar library,
everything Star Wars, a lot of the MCU, and much more. By year five, it
expects 50+ original series, 10,000+ past episodes and 500+ movies in the
library. It closed the content announce by revealing that _The Simpsons_ will
be a Disney Plus streaming exclusive when the service launches.

![Disney](https://o.aolcdn.com/images/dims?resize=2000%2C2000%2Cshrink&image_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fs.yimg.com%2Fos%2Fcreatr-
uploaded-
images%2F2019-04%2F907eafb0-5cad-11e9-b9ff-14a70ea89f03&client=a1acac3e1b3290917d92&signature=17a7ddec10e09c65a118036fdc121a9a6e222ef4)

As far as where you'll be able to watch, we saw the app running in a smart TV
UI that looked like most Apple TV apps, as well as a tablet interface. The
goal is to have it everywhere, and while Disney announced Roku and PS4 as
partners by name, it plans to have availability on the usual list of TVs, set-
top boxes, dongles and game consoles when it launches.

Disney revealed its plans for a "worldwide" rollout touching all of the
"major" regions in North America, Europe, Asia-Pacific and Latin America over
the next couple of years. It doesn't sound like it will touch Netflix's actual
worldwide ability that skips only a few countries, but should reach most of
the larger markets by 2021.

Disney execs confirmed that going forward, all of their theatrical releases
will be exclusive to Disney+ in their streaming windows, which includes all of
the big movies that have yet to debut in 2019, like _The Lion King_ and
_Avengers: Endgame_.

